F °
‘
« SHOESSESESSeRREEEEEES |e

A

e © geoccces
°
tt
°
°
°

peseeses
© seccceses

Remarkable Results

Tiny Changes,

333

pesecssses
ssssssessss

An Easy & Proven Way to
Build Good Habits & Break Bad Ones

James Clear
ATOMIC
HABITS

An Easy & Proven Way
to Build Good Habits &
Break Bad Ones

JAMES CLEAR

Tiny Changes,
Remarkable
Results

AVERY
an imprint of Penguin Random House

New York
AVERY
AN IMPRINT OF PENGUIN RANDOM HOUSE LLC.

375 Hudson Street
New York, New York 10014

Copyright © 2018 by James Clear
Penguin supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices, promotes free speech, and creates a vibrant culture, Thank you for buying an authorized edition of this book and for
complying with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or distributing any part of it in any form without permission. You are supporting writers and allowing Penguin to continue to publish books
for every reader.
Ebook ISBN 9780735211308

While the author has made every effort to provide accurate Internet addresses at the time of publication, neither the publisher nor the author assumes any responsibility for errors, or for changes that occur
after publication. Further, the publisher does not have any control over and does not assume any responsibility for author or third-party websites or their content.

Version_1
a-tom-ic

a'tamik
an extremely small amount of a thing; the single irreducible unit of a larger system.

the source of immense energy or power.

hab-it

‘habat

a routine or practice performed regularly; an automatic response to a specific situation.
Contents

Title Page

Copyright

Epigraph

Introduction: My Story

The Fundamentals
Why Tiny Changes Make a Big Difference

1 The Surprising Power of Atomic Habits

2 How Your Habits Shape Your Identity (and Vice Versa)

3 How to Build Better Habits in 4 Simple Steps

The 1st Law
Make It Obvious

4:The Man Who Didn’t Look Right
5 The Best Way to Start a New Habit

6 Motivation Is Overrated; Environment Often Matters More

7 The Secret to Self-Control

The 2nd La
Make It Attractive

8 How to Make a Habit hresistible

9 The Role of Family and Friends in Shaping Your Habits

10 How to Find and Fix the Causes of Your Bad Habits

The 3rd Law
Make It Easy
11 Walk Slowly, but Never Backward

12 The Law of Least Effort

13 How to Stop Procrastinating by Using the Two-Minute Rule

14 How to Make Good Habits Inevitable and Bad Habits Impossible

The 4th Law
Make It Satisfyin

15 The Cardinal Rule of Behavior Change

16 How to Stick with Good Habits Every Day

17 How an Accountability Partner Can Change Everythin;

Advanced Tactics
How to Go from Being Merely Good to Being Truly Great

18 The Truth About Talent (When Genes Matter and When They Don’t)

19 The Goldilocks Rule: How to Stay Motivated in Life and Work

20 The Downside of Creating Good Habi

Conclusion: The Secret to Results That Last

Appendix

What Should You Read Next?
ttle Lessons from the Four Laws

How to Apply These Ideas to Business
How to Apply These Ideas to Parenting
Acknowledgments

Notes
Index
‘About the Author

Introduction

My Story

O.... ana. day of my sophomore year of high school, I was hit in the face with a

baseball bat. As my classmate took a full swing, the bat slipped out of his hands
and came flying toward me before striking me directly between the eyes. I have
no memory of the moment of impact.

The bat smashed into my face with such force that it crushed my nose into a
distorted U-shape. The collision sent the soft tissue of my brain slamming into
the inside of my skull. Immediately, a wave of swelling surged throughout my
head. In a fraction of a second, I had a broken nose, multiple skull fractures, and
two shattered eye sockets.

When I opened my eyes, I saw people staring at me and running over to help.
I looked down and noticed spots of red on my clothes. One of my classmates
took the shirt off his back and handed it to me. I used it to plug the stream of
blood rushing from my broken nose. Shocked and confused, I was unaware of
how seriously I had been injured.

My teacher looped his arm around my shoulder and we began the long walk to
the nurse’s office: across the field, down the hill, and back into school. Random
hands touched my sides, holding me upright. We took our time and walked
slowly. Nobody realized that every minute mattered.

When we arrived at the nurse’s office, she asked me a series of questions.

“What year is it?”

“1998,” I answered. It was actually 2002.

“Who is the president of the United States?”

“Bill Clinton,” I said. The correct answer was George W. Bush.

“What is your mom’s name?”

“Uh. Um.” I stalled. Ten seconds passed.

“Patti,” I said casually, ignoring the fact that it had taken me ten seconds to
remember my own mother’s name.

That is the last question I remember. My body was unable to handle the rapid
swelling in my brain and I lost consciousness before the ambulance arrived.
Minutes later, I was carried out of school and taken to the local hospital.

Shortly after arriving, my body began shutting down. I struggled with basic
functions like swallowing and breathing. I had my first seizure of the day. Then I
stopped breathing entirely. As the doctors hurried to supply me with oxygen,
they also decided the local hospital was unequipped to handle the situation and
ordered a helicopter to fly me to a larger hospital in Cincinnati.

I was rolled out of the emergency room doors and toward the helipad across
the street. The stretcher rattled on a bumpy sidewalk as one nurse pushed me
along while another pumped each breath into me by hand. My mother, who had
arrived at the hospital a few moments before, climbed into the helicopter beside
me. I remained unconscious and unable to breathe on my own as she held my
hand during the flight.

While my mother rode with me in the helicopter, my father went home to
check on my brother and sister and break the news to them. He choked back
tears as he explained to my sister that he would miss her eighth-grade graduation
ceremony that night. After passing my siblings off to family and friends, he
drove to Cincinnati to meet my mother.

When my mom and I landed on the roof of the hospital, a team of nearly
twenty doctors and nurses sprinted onto the helipad and wheeled me into the
trauma unit. By this time, the swelling in my brain had become so severe that I
was having repeated post-traumatic seizures. My broken bones needed to be
fixed, but I was in no condition to undergo surgery. After yet another seizure—
my third of the day—I was put into a medically induced coma and placed on a
ventilator.

My parents were no strangers to this hospital. Ten years earlier, they had
entered the same building on the ground floor after my sister was diagnosed with
leukemia at age three. I was five at the time. My brother was just six months old.
After two and a half years of chemotherapy treatments, spinal taps, and bone
marrow biopsies, my little sister finally walked out of the hospital happy,
healthy, and cancer free. And now, after ten years of normal life, my parents
found themselves back in the same place with a different child.

While I slipped into a coma, the hospital sent a priest and a social worker to
comfort my parents. It was the same priest who had met with them a decade
earlier on the evening they found out my sister had cancer.

As day faded into night, a series of machines kept me alive. My parents slept
restlessly on a hospital mattress—one moment they would collapse from fatigue,
the next they would be wide awake with worry. My mother would tell me later,
“Tt was one of the worst nights I’ve ever had.”

MY RECOVERY
Mercifully, by the next morning my breathing had rebounded to the point where
the doctors felt comfortable releasing me from the coma. When I finally
regained consciousness, I discovered that I had lost my ability to smell. As a test,
a nurse asked me to blow my nose and sniff an apple juice box. My sense of
smell returned, but—to everyone’s surprise—the act of blowing my nose forced
air through the fractures in my eye socket and pushed my left eye outward. My
eyeball bulged out of the socket, held precariously in place by my eyelid and the
optic nerve attaching my eye to my brain.

The ophthalmologist said my eye would gradually slide back into place as the
air seeped out, but it was hard to tell how long this would take. I was scheduled
for surgery one week later, which would allow me some additional time to heal.
I looked like I had been on the wrong end of a boxing match, but I was cleared
to leave the hospital. I returned home with a broken nose, half a dozen facial
fractures, and a bulging left eye.

The following months were hard. It felt like everything in my life was on
pause. I had double vision for weeks; I literally couldn’t see straight. It took
more than a month, but my eyeball did eventually return to its normal location.
Between the seizures and my vision problems, it was eight months before I could
drive a car again. At physical therapy, I practiced basic motor patterns like
walking in a straight line. I was determined not to let my injury get me down, but
there were more than a few moments when I felt depressed and overwhelmed.

I became painfully aware of how far I had to go when I returned to the
baseball field one year later. Baseball had always been a major part of my life.
My dad had played minor league baseball for the St. Louis Cardinals, and I had a
dream of playing professionally, too. After months of rehabilitation, what I
wanted more than anything was to get back on the field.

But my return to baseball was not smooth. When the season rolled around, I
was the only junior to be cut from the varsity baseball team. I was sent down to
play with the sophomores on junior varsity. I had been playing since age four,
and for someone who had spent so much time and effort on the sport, getting cut
was humiliating. I vividly remember the day it happened. I sat in my car and
cried as I flipped through the radio, desperately searching for a song that would
make me feel better.

After a year of self-doubt, I managed to make the varsity team as a senior, but
I rarely made it on the field. In total, I played eleven innings of high school
varsity baseball, barely more than a single game.

Despite my lackluster high school career, I still believed I could become a
great player. And I knew that if things were going to improve, I was the one
responsible for making it happen. The turning point came two years after my
injury, when I began college at Denison University. It was a new beginning, and
it was the place where I would discover the surprising power of small habits for
the first time.

HOW I LEARNED ABOUT HABITS

Attending Denison was one of the best decisions of my life. I earned a spot on
the baseball team and, although I was at the bottom of the roster as a freshman, I
was thrilled. Despite the chaos of my high school years, I had managed to
become a college athlete.

I wasn’t going to be starting on the baseball team anytime soon, so I focused
on getting my life in order. While my peers stayed up late and played video
games, I built good sleep habits and went to bed early each night. In the messy
world of a college dorm, I made a point to keep my room neat and tidy. These
improvements were minor, but they gave me a sense of control over my life. I
started to feel confident again. And this growing belief in myself rippled into the
classroom as I improved my study habits and managed to earn straight A’s
during my first year.

A habit is a routine or behavior that is performed regularly—and, in many
cases, automatically. As each semester passed, I accumulated small but
consistent habits that ultimately led to results that were unimaginable to me
when I started. For example, for the first time in my life, I made it a habit to lift
weights multiple times per week, and in the years that followed, my six-foot-
four-inch frame bulked up from a featherweight 170 to a lean 200 pounds.

When my sophomore season arrived, I earned a starting role on the pitching
staff. By my junior year, I was voted team captain and at the end of the season, I
was selected for the all-conference team. But it was not until my senior season
that my sleep habits, study habits, and strength-training habits really began to
pay off.

Six years after I had been hit in the face with a baseball bat, flown to the
hospital, and placed into a coma, I was selected as the top male athlete at
Denison University and named to the ESPN Academic All-America Team—an
honor given to just thirty-three players across the country. By the time I
graduated, I was listed in the school record books in eight different categories.
That same year, I was awarded the university’s highest academic honor, the
President’s Medal.

I hope you’ll forgive me if this sounds boastful. To be honest, there was
nothing legendary or historic about my athletic career. I never ended up playing
professionally. However, looking back on those years, I believe I accomplished
something just as rare: I fulfilled my potential. And I believe the concepts in this
book can help you fulfill your potential as well.

We all face challenges in life. This injury was one of mine, and the experience
taught me a critical lesson: changes that seem small and unimportant at first will
compound into remarkable results if you’re willing to stick with them for years.
We all deal with setbacks but in the long run, the quality of our lives often
depends on the quality of our habits. With the same habits, you’ll end up with
the same results. But with better habits, anything is possible.

Maybe there are people who can achieve incredible success overnight. I don’t
know any of them, and I’m certainly not one of them. There wasn’t one defining
moment on my journey from medically induced coma to Academic All-
American; there were many. It was a gradual evolution, a long series of small
wins and tiny breakthroughs. The only way I made progress—the only choice I
had—was to start small. And I employed this same strategy a few years later
when I started my own business and began working on this book.

HOW AND WHY I WROTE THIS BOOK

In November 2012, I began publishing articles at jamesclear.com. For years, I
had been keeping notes about my personal experiments with habits and I was
finally ready to share some of them publicly. I began by publishing a new article
every Monday and Thursday. Within a few months, this simple writing habit led
to my first one thousand email subscribers, and by the end of 2013 that number
had grown to more than thirty thousand people.

In 2014, my email list expanded to over one hundred thousand subscribers,
which made it one of the fastest-growing newsletters on the internet. I had felt
like an impostor when I began writing two years earlier, but now I was
becoming known as an expert on habits—a new label that excited me but also
felt uncomfortable. I had never considered myself a master of the topic, but
rather someone who was experimenting alongside my readers.

In 2015, I reached two hundred thousand email subscribers and signed a book
deal with Penguin Random House to begin writing the book you are reading
now. As my audience grew, so did my business opportunities. I was increasingly
asked to speak at top companies about the science of habit formation, behavior
change, and continuous improvement. I found myself delivering keynote
speeches at conferences in the United States and Europe.

In 2016, my articles began to appear regularly in major publications like Time,
Entrepreneur, and Forbes. Incredibly, my writing was read by over eight million
people that year. Coaches in the NFL, NBA, and MLB began reading my work
and sharing it with their teams.

At the start of 2017, I launched the Habits Academy, which became the
premier training platform for organizations and individuals interested in building
better habits in life and work.* Fortune 500 companies and growing start-ups
began to enroll their leaders and train their staff. In total, over ten thousand
leaders, managers, coaches, and teachers have graduated from the Habits
Academy, and my work with them has taught me an incredible amount about
what it takes to make habits work in the real world.

As I put the finishing touches on this book in 2018, jamesclear.com is
receiving millions of visitors per month and nearly five hundred thousand people
subscribe to my weekly email newsletter—a number that is so far beyond my
expectations when I began that I’m not even sure what to think of it.

HOW THIS BOOK WILL BENEFIT YOU

The entrepreneur and investor Naval Ravikant has said, “To write a great book,
you must first become the book.” I originally learned about the ideas mentioned
here because I had to live them. I had to rely on small habits to rebound from my
injury, to get stronger in the gym, to perform at a high level on the field, to
become a writer, to build a successful business, and simply to develop into a
responsible adult. Small habits helped me fulfill my potential, and since you
picked up this book, I’m guessing you’d like to fulfill yours as well.

In the pages that follow, I will share a step-by-step plan for building better
habits—not for days or weeks, but for a lifetime. While science supports
everything I’ve written, this book is not an academic research paper; it’s an
operating manual. You’ll find wisdom and practical advice front and center as I
explain the science of how to create and change your habits in a way that is easy
to understand and apply.

The fields I draw on—biology, neuroscience, philosophy, psychology, and
more—have been around for many years. What I offer you is a synthesis of the
best ideas smart people figured out a long time ago as well as the most
compelling discoveries scientists have made recently. My contribution, I hope, is
to find the ideas that matter most and connect them in a way that is highly
actionable. Anything wise in these pages you should credit to the many experts
who preceded me. Anything foolish, assume it is my error.

The backbone of this book is my four-step model of habits—cue, craving,
response, and reward—and the four laws of behavior change that evolve out of
these steps. Readers with a psychology background may recognize some of these
terms from operant conditioning, which was first proposed as “stimulus,
response, reward” by B. F. Skinner in the 1930s and has been popularized more
recently as “cue, routine, reward” in The Power of Habit by Charles Duhigg.

Behavioral scientists like Skinner realized that if you offered the right reward
or punishment, you could get people to act in a certain way. But while Skinner’s
model did an excellent job of explaining how external stimuli influenced our
habits, it lacked a good explanation for how our thoughts, feelings, and beliefs
impact our behavior. Internal states—our moods and emotions—matter, too. In
recent decades, scientists have begun to determine the connection between our
thoughts, feelings, and behavior. This research will also be covered in these
pages.

In total, the framework I offer is an integrated model of the cognitive and
behavioral sciences. I believe it is one of the first models of human behavior to
accurately account for both the influence of external stimuli and internal
emotions on our habits. While some of the language may be familiar, I am
confident that the details—and the applications of the Four Laws of Behavior
Change—will offer a new way to think about your habits.

Human behavior is always changing: situation to situation, moment to
moment, second to second. But this book is about what doesn’t change. It’s
about the fundamentals of human behavior. The lasting principles you can rely
on year after year. The ideas you can build a business around, build a family
around, build a life around.

There is no one right way to create better habits, but this book describes the
best way I know—an approach that will be effective regardless of where you
start or what you’re trying to change. The strategies I cover will be relevant to
anyone looking for a step-by-step system for improvement, whether your goals
center on health, money, productivity, relationships, or all of the above. As long
as human behavior is involved, this book will be your guide.
THE
FUNDAMENTALS

Why Tiny Changes Make a Big Difference
1
The Surprising Power of Atomic Habits

T.. rare or British Cycling changed one day in 2003. The organization, which was

the governing body for professional cycling in Great Britain, had recently hired
Dave Brailsford as its new performance director. At the time, professional
cyclists in Great Britain had endured nearly one hundred years of mediocrity.
Since 1908, British riders had won just a single gold medal at the Olympic
Games, and they had fared even worse in cycling’s biggest race, the Tour de
France. In 110 years, no British cyclist had ever won the event.

In fact, the performance of British riders had been so underwhelming that one
of the top bike manufacturers in Europe refused to sell bikes to the team because
they were afraid that it would hurt sales if other professionals saw the Brits using
their gear.

Brailsford had been hired to put British Cycling on a new trajectory. What
made him different from previous coaches was his relentless commitment to a
strategy that he referred to as “fié A@Gregation Gi Harsinal Pains,” which was the
philosophy of searching for a tiny margin of improvement in everything you do.
Brailsford said, “The whole principle came from the idea that if you broke down
everything you could think of that goes into riding a bike, and then improve it by
1 percent, you will get a significant increase when you put them all together.”

Brailsford and his coaches began by making small adjustments you might
expect from a professional cycling team. They redesigned the bike seats to make
them more comfortable and rubbed alcohol on the tires for a better grip. They
asked riders to wear electrically heated overshorts to maintain ideal muscle
temperature while riding and used biofeedback sensors to monitor how each
athlete responded to a particular workout. The team tested various fabrics in a
wind tunnel and had their outdoor riders switch to indoor racing suits, which
proved to be lighter and more aerodynamic.

But they didn’t stop there. Brailsford and his team continued to find 1 percent
improvements in overlooked and unexpected areas. They tested different types
of massage gels to see which one led to the fastest muscle recovery. They hired a
surgeon to teach each rider the best way to wash their hands to reduce the
chances of catching a cold. They determined the type of pillow and mattress that
led to the best night’s sleep for each rider. They even painted the inside of the
team truck white, which helped them spot little bits of dust that would normally
slip by unnoticed but could degrade the performance of the finely tuned bikes.

As these and hundreds of other small improvements accumulated, the results
came faster than anyone could have imagined.

Just five years after Brailsford took over, the British Cycling team dominated
the road and track cycling events at the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing, where
they won an astounding 60 percent of the gold medals available. Four years
later, when the Olympic Games came to London, the Brits raised the bar as they
set nine Olympic records and seven world records.

That same year, Bradley Wiggins became the first British cyclist to win the
Tour de France. The next year, his teammate Chris Froome won the race, and he
would go on to win again in 2015, 2016, and 2017, giving the British team five
Tour de France victories in six years.

During the ten-year span from 2007 to 2017, British cyclists won 178 world
championships and sixty-six Olympic or Paralympic gold medals and captured
five Tour de France victories in what is widely regarded as the most successful
run in cycling history.*

How does this happen? How does a team of previously ordinary athletes
transform into world champions with tiny changes that, at first glance, would
seem to make a modest difference at best? Why do small improvements
accumulate into such remarkable results, and how can you replicate this
approach in your own life?

It is so easy to overestimate the importance of one defining moment and
underestimate the value of making small improvements on a daily basis. Too
often, we convince ourselves that massive success requires massive action.
Whether it is losing weight, building a business, writing a book, winning a

championship, or achieving any other goal, we put pressure on ourselves 0
make some earth-shattering improvement that everyone will talk about

Meanwhile, improving by 1 percent isn’t particularly notable—sometimes it

isn’t even noticeable—but it can be far More/meaningful) especially in’ the long

fun) The difference a tiny improvement can make over time is astounding.

Here’s how the math works out: if you Galligetllpercent better gai iday:for"one

Conversely, if you get 1 percent worse each day for one year, you’ll decline
nearly down to zero. What starts as a small win or a minor setback accumulates
into something much more.

1% BETTER EVERY DAY

1% worse every day for one year. 0.99265 = 00.03

1% better every day for one year. 1.01365 = 37.78

RESULTS

1% IMPROVEMENT

1% DECLINE

TIME

FIGURE 1: The effects of small habits compound over time. For example, if you can get just 1 percent better each day, you’ll end up with results that are nearly 37 times better after one
year.

Habits are the compound interest of selfimprovement. The same way that
money multiplies through compound interest, the effects of your habits multiply
as you repeat them. They seem to make little difference on any given day and yet
the impact they deliver over the months and years can be enormous. It is only
when looking back two, five, or perhaps ten years later that the value of good
habits and the cost of bad ones becomes strikingly apparent.

This can be a difficult concept to appreciate in daily life. We often dismiss
small changes because they don’t seem to matter very much in the moment. If
you save a little money now, you’re still not a millionaire. If you go to the gym
three days in a row, you're still out of shape. If you study Mandarin for an hour
tonight, you still haven’t learned the language. We make a few changes, but the
results never seem to come quickly and so we slide back into our previous
routines.

Unfortunately, the slow pace of transformation also makes it easy to let a bad
habit slide. If you eat an unhealthy meal today, the scale doesn’t move much. If
you work late tonight and ignore your family, they will forgive you. If you
procrastinate and put your project off until tomorrow, there will usually be time
to finish it later. A single decision is easy to dismiss.

But when we repeat 1 percent errors, day after day, by replicating poor
decisions, duplicating tiny mistakes, and rationalizing little excuses, our small
choices compound into toxic results. It’s the accumulation of many missteps—a
1 percent decline here and there—that eventually leads to a problem.

The impact created by a change in your habits is similar to the effect of
shifting the route of an airplane by just a few degrees. Imagine you are flying
from Los Angeles to New York City. If a pilot leaving from LAX adjusts the
heading just 3.5 degrees south, you will land in Washington, D.C., instead of
New York. Such a small change is barely noticeable at takeoff—the nose of the
airplane moves just a few feet—but when magnified across the entire United
States, you end up hundreds of miles apart.*

Similarly, a slight change in your daily habits can guide your life to a very

different destination. Making a choice that is percent better or 1 percent worse

That said, it doesn’t matter how successful or unsuccessful you are right now.
What matters is whether your habits are putting you on the path toward success.
You should be far more concerned with your current trajectory than with your
current results. If you’re a millionaire but you spend more than you earn each
month, then you’re on a bad trajectory. If your spending habits don’t change, it’s
not going to end well. Conversely, if you’re broke, but you save a little bit every
month, then you’re on the path toward financial freedom—even if you’re
moving slower than you’d like.

Your outcomes are a lagging measure of your habits. Your net worth is a
lagging measure of your financial habits. Your weight is a lagging measure of
your eating habits. Your knowledge is a lagging measure of your learning habits.
Your clutter is a lagging measure of your cleaning habits. You get what you
repeat.
If you want to predict where you’II end up in life, all you have to do is follow
the curve of tiny gains or tiny losses, and see how your daily choices will

compound ten or twenty years down the line. Are) you) Spending) less) than) you
earn each month? Are you making it into the gym each week? Are you reading
books and learning something new each day? Tiny battles like these are the ones
that will define your future self.
Time magnifies the margin between success and failure. It will multiply
whatever you feed it. Good! habits make time your ally. Bad habits make time
your enemy.

Habits are a double-edged sword. Bad habits can cut you down just as easily
as good habits can build you up, which is why understanding the details is

crucial. You need to know how habits work and how to design them to your
liking, so you can avoid the dangerous half of the blade.

YOUR HABITS CAN COMPOUND FOR YOU OR AGAINST YOU

Positive Compounding}

WHAT PROGRESS IS REALLY LIKE

Imagine that you have an ice cube sitting on the table in front of you. The room
is cold and you can see your breath. It is currently twenty-five degrees. Ever so
slowly, the room begins to heat up.

Twenty-six degrees.

Twenty-seven.

Twenty-eight.

The ice cube is still sitting on the table in front of you.

Twenty-nine degrees.
Thirty.

Thirty-one.

Still, nothing has happened.

Then, thirty-two degrees. The ice begins to melt. A one-degree shift,
seemingly no different from the temperature increases before it, has unlocked a
huge change.

Breakthrough moments are often the result of many previous actions, which
build up the potential required to unleash a major change. This pattern shows up
everywhere. Cancer spends 80 percent of its life undetectable, then takes over
the body in months. Bamboo can barely be seen for the first five years as it
builds extensive root systems underground before exploding ninety feet into the
air within six weeks.

Similarly, habits often appear to make no difference until you cross a critical
threshold and unlock a new level of performance. In the early and middle stages

of any quest, there is often a Valley of Disappointment. Youw/expect/to make

This is one of the core reasons why it is so hard to build habits that last.
People make a few small changes, fail to see a tangible result, and decide to stop.
You think, “I’ve been running every day for a month, so why can’t I see any
change in my body?” Once this kind of thinking takes over, it’s easy to let good
habits fall by the wayside. But in order to make a meaningful difference, habits
need to persist long enough to break through this plateau—what I call the
Plateau of Latent Potential.

If you find yourself struggling to build a good habit or break a bad one, it is
not because you have lost your ability to improve. It is often because you have
not yet crossed the Plateau of Latent Potential. Complaining about not achieving
success despite working hard is like complaining about an ice cube not melting
when you heated it from twenty-five to thirty-one degrees. Your work was not
wasted; it is just being stored. All the action happens at thirty-two degrees.

The outside world only sees the most dramatic event
rather than all that preceded it. But you know that it’s the work you did long ago
—when it seemed that you weren’t making any progress—that makes the jump
today possible.

It is the human equivalent of geological pressure. Two tectonic plates can
grind against one another for millions of years, the tension slowly building all
the while. Then, one day, they rub each other once again, in the same fashion
they have for ages, but this time the tension is too great. An earthquake erupts.
Change can take years—before it happens all at once.

Mastery requires patience. The San Antonio Spurs, one of the most successful
teams in NBA history, have a quote from social reformer Jacob Riis hanging in
their locker room: “When nothing seems to help, I go and look at a stonecutter
hammering away at his rock, perhaps a hundred times without as much as a
crack showing in it. Yet at the hundred and first blow it will split in two, and I
know it was not that last blow that did it—but all that had gone before.”

THE PLATEAU OF LATENT POTENTIAL

RESULTS WHAT YOU THINK
SHOULD HAPPEN

<— WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENS

VALLEY OF
DISAPPOINTMENT

FIGURE 2: We often expect progress to be linear. At the very least, we hope it will come quickly. In reality, the results of our efforts are often delayed. It is not until months or years later
that we realize the true value of the previous work we have done. This can result in a “valley of disappointment” where people feel discouraged after putting in weeks or months of hard work
without experiencing any results. However, this work was not wasted. It was simply being stored. It is not until much later that the full value of previous efforts is revealed.

All big things come from small beginnings. The seed of every habit is a
single, tiny decision. But as that decision is repeated, a habit sprouts and grows
stronger. Roots entrench themselves and branches grow. The task of breaking a
bad habit is like uprooting a powerful oak within us. And the task of building a
good habit is like cultivating a delicate flower one day at a time.

But what determines whether we stick with a habit long enough to survive the
Plateau of Latent Potential and break through to the other side? What is it that
causes some people to slide into unwanted habits and enables others to enjoy the
compounding effects of good ones?

FORGET ABOUT GOALS, FOCUS ON SYSTEMS INSTEAD

Prevailing wisdom claims that the best way to achieve what we want in life—
getting into better shape, building a successful business, relaxing more and
worrying less, spending more time with friends and family—is to set specific,
actionable goals.

For many years, this was how I approached my habits, too. Each one was a
goal to be reached. I set goals for the grades I wanted to get in school, for the
weights I wanted to lift in the gym, for the profits I wanted to earn in business. I
succeeded at a few, but I failed at a lot of them. Eventually, I began to realize
that my results had very little to do with the goals I set and nearly everything to
do with the systems I followed.

What’s the difference between systems and goals? It’s a distinction I first
learned from Scott Adams, the cartoonist behind the Dilbert comic. Goals are
about the results you want to achieve. Systems are about the processes that lead
to those results.

° If you’re a coach, your goal might be to win a championship. Your
system is the way you recruit players, manage your assistant coaches,
and conduct practice.

° If you’re an entrepreneur, your goal might be to build a million-dollar
business. Your system is how you test product ideas, hire employees,
and run marketing campaigns.

° If you’re a musician, your goal might be to play a new piece. Your
system is how often you practice, how you break down and tackle
difficult measures, and your method for receiving feedback from your
instructor.

Now for the interesting question: If you completely ignored your goals and
focused only on your system, would you still succeed? For example, if you were
a basketball coach and you ignored your goal to win a championship and
focused only on what your team does at practice each day, would you still get
results?

I think you would.
The goal in any sport is to finish with the best score, but it would be ridiculous
to spend the whole game staring at the scoreboard. The only way to actually win
is to get better each day. In the words of three-time Super Bowl winner Bill
Walsh, “The score takes care of itself.” The same is true for other areas of life. If
you want better results, then forget about setting goals. Focus on your system
instead.

What do I mean by this? Are goals completely useless? Of course not. Goals
are good for setting a direction, but systems are best for making progress. A
handful of problems arise when you spend too much time thinking about your
goals and not enough time designing your systems.

Goal setting suffers from a serious case of survivorship bias. We concentrate on
the people who end up winning—the survivors—and mistakenly assume that
ambitious goals led to their success while overlooking all of the people who had
the same objective but didn’t succeed.

Every Olympian wants to win a gold medal. Every candidate wants to get the
job. And if successful and unsuccessful people share the same goals, then the
goal cannot be what differentiates the winners from the losers. It wasn’t the goal
of winning the Tour de France that propelled the British cyclists to the top of the
sport. Presumably, they had wanted to win the race every year before—just like
every other professional team. The goal had always been there. It was only when
they implemented a system of continuous small improvements that they achieved
a different outcome.

Imagine you have a messy room and you set a goal to clean it. If you summon

the energy to tidy up, then you will have a clean room—for now. But if you
maintain the same sloppy, pack-rat habits that led to a messy room in the first
place, soon you’ll be looking at a new pile of clutter and hoping for another burst
of motivation. You’re left chasing the same outcome because you never changed
the system behind it. You treated a symptom without addressing the cause.
Achieving a goal only changes your life for the moment. That’s the
counterintuitive thing about improvement. We think we need to change our
results, but the results are not the problem. What we really need to change are
the systems that cause those results. When you solve problems at the results
level, you only solve them temporarily. In order to improve for good, you need
to solve problems at the systems level. Fix the inputs and the outputs will fix
themselves.

The implicit assumption behind any goal is this: “Once I reach my goal, then I’ll
be happy.” The problem with a goals-first mentality is that you’re continually
putting happiness off until the next milestone. I’ve slipped into this trap so many
times I’ve lost count. For years, happiness was always something for my future
self to enjoy. I promised myself that once I gained twenty pounds of muscle or
after my business was featured in the New York Times, then I could finally relax.

Furthermore, goals create an “either-or” conflict: either you achieve your goal
and are successful or you fail and you are a disappointment. You mentally box
yourself into a narrow version of happiness. This is misguided. It is unlikely that
your actual path through life will match the exact journey you had in mind when
you set out. It makes no sense to restrict your satisfaction to one scenario when
there are many paths to success.

A systems-first mentality provides the antidote. When you fall in love with the
process rather than the product, you don’t have to wait to give yourself
permission to be happy. You can be satisfied anytime your system is running.
And a system can be successful in many different forms, not just the one you
first envision.

Finally, a goal-oriented mind-set can create a “yo-yo” effect. Many runners work
hard for months, but as soon as they cross the finish line, they stop training. The
race is no longer there to motivate them. When all of your hard work is focused
on a particular goal, what is left to push you forward after you achieve it? This is
why many people find themselves reverting to their old habits after
accomplishing a goal.

The purpose of setting goals is to win the game. The purpose of building
systems is to continue playing the game. True long-term thinking is goal-less
thinking. It’s not about any single accomplishment. It is about the cycle of
endless refinement and continuous improvement. Ultimately, it is your
commitment to the process that will determine your progress.
A SYSTEM OF ATOMIC HABITS

If you’re having trouble changing your habits, the problem isn’t you. The
problem is your system. Bad habits repeat themselves again and again not
because you don’t want to change, but because you have the wrong system for
change.

You do not rise to the level of your goals. You fall to the level of your
systems.

Focusing on the overall system, rather than a single goal, is one of the core
themes of this book. It is also one of the deeper meanings behind the word
atomic. By now, you’ve probably realized that an atomic habit refers to a tiny
change, a marginal gain, a 1 percent improvement. But atomic habits are not just
any old habits, however small. They are little habits that are part of a larger
system. Just as atoms are the building blocks of molecules, atomic habits are the
building blocks of remarkable results.

Habits are like the atoms of our lives. Each one is a fundamental unit that
contributes to your overall improvement. At first, these tiny routines seem
insignificant, but soon they build on each other and fuel bigger wins that
multiply to a degree that far outweighs the cost of their initial investment. They
are both small and mighty. This is the meaning of the phrase atomic habits—a
regular practice or routine that is not only small and easy to do, but also the
source of incredible power; a component of the system of compound growth.
Chapter Summary

2

How Your Habits Shape Your Identity (and Vice
Versa)

W.. is $O easy to repeat bad habits and so hard to form good ones? Few things

can have a more powerful impact on your life than improving your daily habits.
And yet it is likely that this time next year you’ll be doing the same thing rather
than something better.

It often feels difficult to keep good habits going for more than a few days,
even with sincere effort and the occasional burst of motivation. Habits like
exercise, meditation, journaling, and cooking are reasonable for a day or two and
then become a hassle.

However, once your habits are established, they seem to stick around forever
—especially the unwanted ones. Despite our best intentions, unhealthy habits
like eating junk food, watching too much television, procrastinating, and
smoking can feel impossible to break.

Changing our habits is challenging for two reasons: (1) we try to change the
wrong thing and (2) we try to change our habits in the wrong way. In this
chapter, I’ll address the first point. In the chapters that follow, I’ll answer the
second.

Our first mistake is that we try to change the wrong thing. To understand what
I mean, consider that there are three levels at which change can occur. You can
imagine them like the layers of an onion.

THREE LAYERS OF BEHAVIOR CHANGE
OUTCOMES
PROCESSES
IDENTITY

FIGURE 3: There are three layers of behavior change: a change in your outcomes, a change in your processes, or a change in your identity.

The first layer is changing your outcomes. This level is concerned with

s are about what you do. Identity is
about what you believe. When it comes to building habits that last—when it
comes to building a system of 1 percent improvements—the problem is not that
one level is “better” or “worse” than another. All levels of change are useful in
their own way. The problem is the direction of change.

Many people begin the process of changing their habits by focusing on what
they want to achieve. This leads us to outcome-based habits. The alternative is to
build identity-based habits. With this approach, we start by focusing on who we
wish to become.

OUTCOME-BASED HABITS

IDENTITY-BASED HABITS
FIGURE 4: With outcome-based habits, the focus is on what you want to achieve. With identity-based habits, the focus is on who you wish to become.

Imagine two people resisting a cigarette. When offered a smoke, the first
person says, “No thanks. I’m trying to quit.” It sounds like a reasonable
response, but this person still believes they are a smoker who is trying to be
something else. They are hoping their behavior will change while carrying
around the same beliefs.

The second person declines by saying, “No thanks. I’m not a smoker.” It’s a
small difference, but this statement signals a shift in identity. Smoking was part
of their former life, not their current one. They no longer identify as someone
who smokes.

Most people don’t even consider identity change when they set out to
improve. They just think, “I want to be skinny (outcome) and if I stick to this
diet, then I’ll be skinny (process).” They set goals and determine the actions they
should take to achieve those goals without considering the beliefs that drive their
actions. They never shift the way they look at themselves, and they don’t realize
that their old identity can sabotage their new plans for change.

Behind every system of actions are a system of beliefs. The system of a
democracy is founded on beliefs like freedom, majority rule, and social equality.
The system of a dictatorship has a very different set of beliefs like absolute
authority and strict obedience. You can imagine many ways to try to get more
people to vote in a democracy, but such behavior change would never get off the
ground in a dictatorship. That’s not the identity of the system. Voting is a
behavior that is impossible under a certain set of beliefs.

A similar pattern exists whether we are discussing individuals, organizations,
or societies. There are a set of beliefs and assumptions that shape the system, an
identity behind the habits.

Behavior that is incongruent with the self will not last. You may want more
money, but if your identity is someone who consumes rather than creates, then
you’ll continue to be pulled toward spending rather than earning. You may want
better health, but if you continue to prioritize comfort over accomplishment,
you’ ll be drawn to relaxing rather than training. It’s hard to change your habits if
you never change the underlying beliefs that led to your past behavior. You have
a new goal and a new plan, but you haven’t changed who you are.

The story of Brian Clark, an entrepreneur from Boulder, Colorado, provides a
good example. “For as long as I can remember, I’ve chewed my fingernails,”
Clark told me. “It started as a nervous habit when I was young, and then
morphed into an undesirable grooming ritual. One day, I resolved to stop
chewing my nails until they grew out a bit. Through mindful willpower alone, I
managed to do it.”

Then, Clark did something surprising.

“T asked my wife to schedule my first-ever manicure,” he said. “My thought
was that if I started paying to maintain my nails, I wouldn’t chew them. And it
worked, but not for the monetary reason. What happened was the manicure made
my fingers look really nice for the first time. The manicurist even said that—
other than the chewing—I had really healthy, attractive nails. Suddenly, I was
proud of my fingernails. And even though that’s something I had never aspired
to, it made all the difference. I’ve never chewed my nails since; not even a single
close call. And it’s because I now take pride in properly caring for them.”

The ultimate form of intrinsic motivation is when a habit becomes part of your
identity. It’s one thing to say I’m the type of person who wants this. It’s
something very different to say I’m the type of person who is this.

The more pride you have in a particular aspect of your identity, the more
motivated you will be to maintain the habits associated with it. If you’re proud
of how your hair looks, you’!I develop all sorts of habits to care for and maintain
it. If you’re proud of the size of your biceps, you’ll make sure you never skip an
upper-body workout. If you’re proud of the scarves you knit, you’ll be more
likely to spend hours knitting each week. Once your pride gets involved, you’ ll
fight tooth and nail to maintain your habits.

True behavior change is identity change. You might start a habit because of
motivation, but the only reason you’ll stick with one is that it becomes part of
your identity. Anyone can convince themselves to visit the gym or eat healthy
once or twice, but if you don’t shift the belief behind the behavior, then it is hard
to stick with long-term changes. Improvements are only temporary until they
become part of who you are.

The goal is not to read a book, the goal is to become a reader.
The goal is not to run a marathon, the goal is to become a runner.

° The goal is not to learn an instrument, the goal is to become a
musician.

Your behaviors are usually a reflection of your identity. What you do is an
indication of the type of person you believe that you are—either consciously or
nonconsciously.* Research has shown that once a person believes in a particular
aspect of their identity, they are more likely to act in alignment with that belief.
For example, people who identified as “being a voter” were more likely to vote
than those who simply claimed “voting” was an action they wanted to perform.
Similarly, the person who incorporates exercise into their identity doesn’t have
to convince themselves to train. Doing the right thing is easy. After all, when
your behavior and your identity are fully aligned, you are no longer pursuing
behavior change. You are simply acting like the type of person you already
believe yourself to be.

Like all aspects of habit formation, this, too, is a double-edged sword. When
working for you, identity change can be a powerful force for selfimprovement.
When working against you, though, identity change can be a curse. Once you
have adopted an identity, it can be easy to let your allegiance to it impact your
ability to change. Many people walk through life in a cognitive slumber, blindly
following the norms attached to their identity.
“T’m terrible with directions.”

“T’m not a morning person.”

“T’m bad at remembering people’s names.”
“T’m always late.”

“T’m not good with technology.”

“T’m horrible at math.”

... and a thousand other variations.

When you have repeated a story to yourself for years, it is easy to slide into
these mental grooves and accept them as a fact. In time, you begin to resist
certain actions because “that’s not who I am.” There is internal pressure to
maintain your self-image and behave in a way that is consistent with your
beliefs. You find whatever way you can to avoid contradicting yourself.

The more deeply a thought or action is tied to your identity, the more difficult
it is to change it. It can feel comfortable to believe what your culture believes
(group identity) or to do what upholds your self-image (personal identity), even
if it’s wrong. The biggest barrier to positive change at any level—individual,
team, society—is identity conflict. Good habits can make rational sense, but if
they conflict with your identity, you will fail to put them into action.

On any given day, you may struggle with your habits because you’re too busy
or too tired or too overwhelmed or hundreds of other reasons. Over the long run,
however, the real reason you fail to stick with habits is that your self-image gets
in the way. This is why you can’t get too attached to one version of your
identity. Progress requires unlearning. Becoming the best version of yourself
requires you to continuously edit your beliefs, and to upgrade and expand your
identity.

This brings us to an important question: If your beliefs and worldview play
such an important role in your behavior, where do they come from in the first
place? How, exactly, is your identity formed? And how can you emphasize new
aspects of your identity that serve you and gradually erase the pieces that hinder
you?

THE TWO-STEP PROCESS TO CHANGING YOUR IDENTITY

Your identity emerges out of your habits. You are not born with preset beliefs.
Every belief, including those about yourself, is learned and conditioned through
experience.*
More precisely, your habits are how you embody your identity. When you
make your bed each day, you embody the identity of an organized person. When
you write each day, you embody the identity of a creative person. When you
train each day, you embody the identity of an athletic person.

The more you repeat a behavior, the more you reinforce the identity
associated with that behavior. In fact, the word identity was originally derived
from the Latin words essentitas, which means being, and identidem, which
means repeatedly. Your identity is literally your “repeated beingness.”

Whatever your identity is right now, you only believe it because you have
proof of it. If you go to church every Sunday for twenty years, you have
evidence that you are religious. If you study biology for one hour every night,
you have evidence that you are studious. If you go to the gym even when it’s
snowing, you have evidence that you are committed to fitness. The more
evidence you have for a belief, the more strongly you will believe it.

For most of my early life, I didn’t consider myself a writer. If you were to ask
any of my high school teachers or college professors, they would tell you I was
an average writer at best: certainly not a standout. When I began my writing
career, I published a new article every Monday and Thursday for the first few
years. As the evidence grew, so did my identity as a writer. I didn’t start out as a
writer. I became one through my habits.

Of course, your habits are not the only actions that influence your identity, but
by virtue of their frequency they are usually the most important ones. Each
experience in life modifies your self-image, but it’s unlikely you would consider
yourself a soccer player because you kicked a ball once or an artist because you
scribbled a picture. As you repeat these actions, however, the evidence
accumulates and your self-image begins to change. The effect of one-off
experiences tends to fade away while the effect of habits gets reinforced with
time, which means your habits contribute most of the evidence that shapes your
identity. In this way, the process of building habits is actually the process of
becoming yourself.

This is a gradual evolution. We do not change by snapping our fingers and
deciding to be someone entirely new. We change bit by bit, day by day, habit by
habit. We are continually undergoing microevolutions of the self.

Each habit is like a suggestion: “Hey, maybe this is who I am.” If you finish a
book, then perhaps you are the type of person who likes reading. If you go to the
gym, then perhaps you are the type of person who likes exercise. If you practice
. This is one reason why meaningful change does
not require radical change. Small habits can make a meaningful difference by
providing evidence of a new identity. And if a change is meaningful, it actually
is big. That’s the paradox of making small improvements.

Putting this all together, you can see that habits are the path to changing your
identity. The most practical way to change who you are is to change what you
do.

Each time you write a page, you are a writer.

Each time you practice the violin, you are a musician.

Each time you start a workout, you are an athlete.

Each time you encourage your employees, you are a leader.

Each habit not only gets results but also teaches you something far more
important: to trust yourself. You start to believe you can actually accomplish
these things. When the votes mount up and the evidence begins to change, the
story you tell yourself begins to change as well.

Of course, it works the opposite way, too. Every time you choose to perform a
bad habit, it’s a vote for that identity. The good news is that you don’t need to be
perfect. In any election, there are going to be votes for both sides. You don’t
need a unanimous vote to win an election; you just need a majority. It doesn’t
matter if you cast a few votes for a bad behavior or an unproductive habit. Your
goal is simply to win the majority of the time.

New identities require new evidence. If you keep casting the same votes
you’ve always cast, you’re going to get the same results you’ve always had. If
nothing changes, nothing is going to change.

It is a simple two-step process:

L. Decide the type of person you want to be.
2. Prove it to yourself with small wins.

First, decide who you want to be. This holds at any level—as an individual, as
a team, as a community, as a nation. What do you want to stand for? What are
your principles and values? Who do you wish to become?

These are big questions, and many people aren’t sure where to begin—but
they do know what kind of results they want: to get six-pack abs or to feel less
anxious or to double their salary. That’s fine. Start there and work backward
from the results you want to the type of person who could get those results. Ask
yourself, “Who is the type of person that could get the outcome I want?” Who is
the type of person that could lose forty pounds? Who is the type of person that
could learn a new language? Who is the type of person that could run a
successful start-up?

For example,

“

This process can lead to beliefs like:

° “T’m the kind of teacher who stands up for her students.”
“I’m the kind of doctor who gives each patient the time and empathy
they need.”

° “I’m the kind of manager who advocates for her employees.”

Once you have a handle on the type of person you want to be, you can begin
taking small steps to reinforce your desired identity. I have a friend who lost

over 100 pounds by asking herself, *What would a healthy person do?” Alll day

The concept of identity-based habits is our first introduction to another key
theme in this book: feedback loops. Your habits shape your identity, and your
identity shapes your habits. It’s a two-way street. The formation of all habits is a
feedback loop (a concept we will explore in depth in the next chapter), but it’s
important to let your values, principles, and identity drive the loop rather than
your results. The

THE REAL REASON HABITS MATTER

Identity change is the North Star of habit change. The remainder of this book
will provide you with step-by-step instructions on how to build better habits in
yourself, your family, your team, your company, and anywhere else you wish.
But the true question is: “Are you becoming the type of person you want to
become?” The first step is not what or how, but who. You need to know who you
want to be. Otherwise, your quest for change is like a boat without a rudder. And
that’s why we are starting here.

You have the power to change your beliefs about yourself. Your identity is not
set in stone. You have a choice in every moment. You can choose the identity
you want to reinforce today with the habits you choose today. And this brings us
to the deeper purpose of this book and the real reason habits matter.

Building better habits isn’t about littering your day with life hacks. It’s not
about flossing one tooth each night or taking a cold shower each morning or
wearing the same outfit each day. It’s not about achieving external measures of
success like earning more money, losing weight, or reducing stress. Habits can
help you achieve all of these things, but fundamentally they are not about having
something. They are about becoming someone.

Ultimately, your habits matter because they help you become the type of
person you wish to be. They are the channel through which you develop your
deepest beliefs about yourself. Quite literally, you become your habits.
How to Build Better Habits in 4 Simple Steps

I. ws, a psychologist named Edward Thorndike conducted an experiment that

would lay the foundation for our understanding of how habits form and the rules
that guide our behavior. Thorndike was interested in studying the behavior of
animals, and he started by working with cats.

He would place each cat inside a device known as a puzzle box. The box was
designed so that the cat could escape through a door “by some simple act, such
as pulling at a loop of cord, pressing a lever, or stepping on a platform.” For
example, one box contained a lever that, when pressed, would open a door on
the side of the box. Once the door had been opened, the cat could dart out and
run over to a bowl of food.

Most cats wanted to escape as soon as they were placed inside the box. They
would poke their nose into the corners, stick their paws through openings, and
claw at loose objects. After a few minutes of exploration, the cats would happen
to press the magical lever, the door would open, and they would escape.

Thorndike tracked the behavior of each cat across many trials. In the
beginning, the animals moved around the box at random. But as soon as the
lever had been pressed and the door opened, the process of learning began.
Gradually, each cat learned to associate the action of pressing the lever with the
reward of escaping the box and getting to the food.

After twenty to thirty trials, this behavior became so automatic and habitual
that the cat could escape within a few seconds. For example, Thorndike noted,
“Cat 12 took the following times to perform the act. 160 seconds, 30 seconds, 90
seconds, 60, 15, 28, 20, 30, 22, 11, 15, 20, 12, 10, 14, 10, 8, 8, 5, 10, 8, 6, 6, 7.”

During the first three trials, the cat escaped in an average of 1.5 minutes.
During the last three trials, it escaped in an average of 6.3 seconds. With
practice, each cat made fewer errors and their actions became quicker and more
automatic. Rather than repeat the same mistakes, the cat began to cut straight to
the solution.

From his studies, Thorndike described the learning process by stating,
“behaviors followed by satisfying consequences tend to be repeated and those
that produce unpleasant consequences are less likely to be repeated.” His work
provides the perfect starting point for discussing how habits form in our own
lives. It also provides answers to some fundamental questions like: What are
habits? And why does the brain bother building them at all?

WHY YOUR BRAIN BUILDS HABITS

A habit is a behavior that has been repeated enough times to become automatic.
The process of habit formation begins with trial and error. Whenever you
encounter a new situation in life, your brain has to make a decision. How do I
respond to this? The first time you come across a problem, you’re not sure how
to solve it. Like Thorndike’s cat, you’re just trying things out to see what works.

Neurological activity in the brain is high during this period. You are carefully
analyzing the situation and making conscious decisions about how to act. You’re
taking in tons of new information and trying to make sense of it all. The brain is
busy learning the most effective course of action.

Occasionally, like a cat pressing on a lever, you stumble across a solution.
You’re feeling anxious, and you discover that going for a run calms you down.
You’re mentally exhausted from a long day of work, and you learn that playing
video games relaxes you. You’re exploring, exploring, exploring, and then—
BAM—a reward.

After you stumble upon an unexpected reward, you alter your strategy for next
time. Your brain immediately begins to catalog the events that preceded the
reward. Wait a minute—that felt good. What did I do right before that?

This is the feedback loop behind all human behavior: try, fail, learn, try
differently. With practice, the useless movements fade away and the useful
actions get reinforced. That’s a habit forming.

Whenever you face a problem repeatedly, your brain begins to automate the
process of solving it. Your habits are just a series of automatic solutions that
solve the problems and stresses you face regularly. As behavioral scientist Jason
Hreha writes, “Habits are, simply, reliable solutions to recurring problems in our
environment.”

As habits are created, the level of activity in the brain decreases. You learn to
lock in on the cues that predict success and tune out everything else. When a
similar situation arises in the future, you know exactly what to look for. There is
no longer a need to analyze every angle of a situation. Your brain skips the
process of trial and error and creates a mental rule: if this, then that. These
cognitive scripts can be followed automatically whenever the situation is
appropriate. Now, whenever you feel stressed, you get the itch to run. As soon as
you walk in the door from work, you grab the video game controller. A choice
that once required effort is now automatic. A habit has been created.

Habits are mental shortcuts learned from experience. In a sense, a habit is just
a memory of the steps you previously followed to solve a problem in the past.
Whenever the conditions are right, you can draw on this memory and
automatically apply the same solution. The primary reason the brain remembers
the past is to better predict what will work in the future.

Habit formation is incredibly useful because the conscious mind is the
bottleneck of the brain. It can only pay attention to one problem at a time. As a
result, your brain is always working to preserve your conscious attention for
whatever task is most essential. Whenever possible, the conscious mind likes to
pawn off tasks to the nonconscious mind to do automatically. This is precisely
what happens when a habit is formed. Habits reduce cognitive load and free up
mental capacity, so you can allocate your attention to other tasks.

Despite their efficiency, some people still wonder about the benefits of habits.
The argument goes like this: “Will habits make my life dull? I don’t want to
pigeonhole myself into a lifestyle I don’t enjoy. Doesn’t so much routine take
away the vibrancy and spontaneity of life?” Hardly. Such questions set up a false
dichotomy. They make you think that you have to choose between building
habits and attaining freedom. In reality, the two complement each other.

Habits do not restrict freedom. They create it. In fact, the people who don’t
have their habits handled are often the ones with the least amount of freedom.
Without good financial habits, you will always be struggling for the next dollar.
Without good health habits, you will always seem to be short on energy. Without
good learning habits, you will always feel like you’re behind the curve. If you’re
always being forced to make decisions about simple tasks—when should I work
out, where do I go to write, when do I pay the bills—then you have less time for
freedom. It’s only by making the fundamentals of life easier that you can create
the mental space needed for free thinking and creativity.

Conversely, when you have your habits dialed in and the basics of life are
handled and done, your mind is free to focus on new challenges and master the
next set of problems. Building habits in the present allows you to do more of
what you want in the future.
THE SCIENCE OF HOW HABITS WORK

The process of building a habit can be divided into four simple steps: cue,
craving, response, and reward.* Breaking it down into these fundamental parts
can help us understand what a habit is, how it works, and how to improve it.

CUE CRAVING | RESPONSE | REWARD
1 2 3 4

0

FIGURE 5: All habits proceed through four stages in the same order: cue, craving, response, and reward.

This four-step pattern is the backbone of every habit, and your brain runs
through these steps in the same order each time.

First, there is the cue. The cue triggers your brain to initiate a behavior. It is a
bit of information that predicts a reward. Our prehistoric ancestors were paying
attention to cues that signaled the location of primary rewards like food, water,
and sex. Today, we spend most of our time learning cues that predict secondary
rewards like money and fame, power and status, praise and approval, love and
friendship, or a sense of personal satisfaction. (Of course, these pursuits also
indirectly improve our odds of survival and reproduction, which is the deeper
motive behind everything we do.)

Your mind is continuously analyzing your internal and external environment
for hints of where rewards are located. Because the cue is the first indication that
we're close to a reward, it naturally leads to a craving.

Cravings are the second step, and they are the motivational force behind every
habit. Without some level of motivation or desire—without craving a change—
we have no reason to act. What you crave is not the habit itself but the change in
state it delivers. You do not crave smoking a cigarette, you crave the feeling of
relief it provides. You are not motivated by brushing your teeth but rather by the
feeling of a clean mouth. You do not want to turn on the television, you want to
be entertained. Every craving is linked to a desire to change your internal state.
This is an important point that we will discuss in detail later.

Cravings differ from person to person. In theory, any piece of information
could trigger a craving, but in practice, people are not motivated by the same
cues. For a gambler, the sound of slot machines can be a potent trigger that
sparks an intense wave of desire. For someone who rarely gambles, the jingles
and chimes of the casino are just background noise. Cues are meaningless until
they are interpreted. The thoughts, feelings, and emotions of the observer are
what transform a cue into a craving.

The third step is the response. The response is the actual habit you perform,
which can take the form of a thought or an action. Whether a response occurs
depends on how motivated you are and how much friction is associated with the
behavior. If a particular action requires more physical or mental effort than you
are willing to expend, then you won’t do it. Your response also depends on your
ability. It sounds simple, but a habit can occur only if you are capable of doing
it. If you want to dunk a basketball but can’t jump high enough to reach the
hoop, well, you’re out of luck.

Finally, the response delivers a reward. Rewards are the end goal of every
habit. The cue is about noticing the reward. The craving is about wanting the
reward. The response is about obtaining the reward. We chase rewards because
they serve two purposes: (1) they satisfy us and (2) they teach us.

The first purpose of rewards is to satisfy your craving. Yes, rewards provide
benefits on their own. Food and water deliver the energy you need to survive.
Getting a promotion brings more money and respect. Getting in shape improves
your health and your dating prospects. But the more immediate benefit is that
rewards satisfy your craving to eat or to gain status or to win approval. At least
for a moment, rewards deliver contentment and relief from craving.

Second, rewards teach us which actions are worth remembering in the future.
Your brain is a reward detector. As you go about your life, your sensory nervous
system is continuously monitoring which actions satisfy your desires and deliver
pleasure. Feelings of pleasure and disappointment are part of the feedback
mechanism that helps your brain distinguish useful actions from useless ones.
Rewards close the feedback loop and complete the habit cycle.

If a behavior is insufficient in any of the four stages, it will not become a
habit. Eliminate the cue and your habit will never start. Reduce the craving and
you won’t experience enough motivation to act. Make the behavior difficult and
you won’t be able to do it. And if the reward fails to satisfy your desire, then
you’ll have no reason to do it again in the future. Without the first three steps, a
behavior will not occur. Without all four, a behavior will not be repeated.

THE HABIT LOOP
CUE CRAVING

REWARD RESPONSE

FIGURE 6: The four stages of habit are best described as a feedback loop. They form an endless cycle that is running every moment you are alive. This “habit loop” is continually scanning
the environment, predicting what will happen next, trying out different responses, and learning from the results.*

In summary, the cue triggers a craving, which motivates a response, which
provides a reward, which satisfies the craving and, ultimately, becomes
associated with the cue. Together, these four steps form a neurological feedback
loop—cue, craving, response, reward; cue, craving, response, reward—that
ultimately allows you to create automatic habits. This cycle is known as the habit
loop.

This four-step process is not something that happens occasionally, but rather it
is an endless feedback loop that is running and active during every moment you
are alive—even now. The brain is continually scanning the environment,
predicting what will happen next, trying out different responses, and learning
from the results. The entire process is completed in a split second, and we use it
again and again without realizing everything that has been packed into the
previous moment.

We can split these four steps into two phases: the problem phase and the
solution phase. The problem phase includes the cue and the craving, and it is
when you realize that something needs to change. The solution phase includes
the response and the reward, and it is when you take action and achieve the
change you desire.

(Problem phase|

1. Cue
2. Craving

Solution phase

3. Response
4, Reward

All behavior is driven by the desire to solve a problem. Sometimes the
problem is that you notice something good and you want to obtain it. Sometimes
the problem is that you are experiencing pain and you want to relieve it. Either
way, the purpose of every habit is to solve the problems you face.

In the table on the following page, you can see a few examples of what this
looks like in real life.

Imagine walking into a dark room and flipping on the light switch. You have
performed this simple habit so many times that it occurs without thinking. You
proceed through all four stages in the fraction of a second. The urge to act strikes
you without thinking.

Problem phase|

1. Cue: Your phone buzzes with a new text message.
2. Craving: You want to learn the contents of the message.

Solution phase|

3. Response: You grab your phone and read the text.
4, Reward: You saffsty your craving to read the message. Grabbing your phone becomes associated with your phone buzzing.

roblem phase

1, Cue: You are answering emails.

2, Craving: You begin to feel stressed and overwhelmed by work, You want to feel in control.

Solution phase

3, Response: You bite your nails.
4, Reward: You satisfy your craving to reduce stress. Biting your nails becomes associated with answering email.
Problem phase}

1. Cue: You wake up.
2. Craving: You want to feel alerg

Solution phase

3, Response: You drink a cup of coffee,

4, Reward: You satisfy your craving to feel alert, Drinking coffee becomes associated with waking up.

Problem phase|

1, Cue: You smell a doughnut shop as you walk down the street near your office.
2. Craving: You begin to crave a doughnut}

Solution phase

3. Response: You buy a doughnut and eat it.
4, Reward: You satisfy your craving to eat a doughnut. Buying a doughnut becomes associated with walking down the street near your office.

Problem phase}

1, Cue: You hit a stumbling block on a project at work,

2. Craving: You feel stuck and want to relieve your frustration,

Solution phase

3, Response: You pull out your phone and check social media,

4, Reward: You satisfy your craving to feel relieved. Checking social media becomes associated with feeling stalled at work.

Problem phase|

1, Cue: You walk into a dark room.
2. Craving: You want to be able to see.

Solution phase}

3. Response: You flip the light switch.
4, Reward: You satisfy your craving to see. Turning on the light switch becomes associated with being in a dark room,

By the time we become adults, we rarely notice the habits that are running our
lives. Most of us never give a second thought to the fact that we tie the same
shoe first each morning, or unplug the toaster after each use, or always change
into comfortable clothes after getting home from work. After decades of mental
programming, we automatically slip into these patterns of thinking and acting.

THE FOUR LAWS OF BEHAVIOR CHANGE
In the following chapters, we will see time and again how the four stages of cue,
craving, response, and reward influence nearly everything we do each day. But
before we do that, we need to transform these four steps into a practical
framework that we can use to design good habits and eliminate bad ones.

I refer to this framework as the Four Laws of Behavior Change, and it
provides a simple set of rules for creating good habits and breaking bad ones.
You can think of each law as a lever that influences human behavior. When the
levers are in the right positions, creating good habits is effortless. When they are
in the wrong positions, it is nearly impossible.

How to Create a Good Habit

We can invert these laws to learn how to break a bad habit.

How to Break a Bad Habit

It would be irresponsible for me to claim that these four laws are an
exhaustive framework for changing any human behavior, but I think they’re
close. As you will soon see, the Four Laws of Behavior Change apply to nearly
every field, from sports to politics, art to medicine, comedy to management.
These laws can be used no matter what challenge you are facing. There is no
need for completely different strategies for each habit.

Whenever you want to change your behavior, you can simply ask yourself:

i

If you have ever wondered, “Why don’t I do what I say I’m going to do? Why
don’t I lose the weight or stop smoking or save for retirement or start that side
business? Why do I say something is important but never seem to make time for
it?” The answers to those questions can be found somewhere in these four laws.
The key to creating good habits and breaking bad ones is to understand these
fundamental laws and how to alter them to your specifications. Every goal is
doomed to fail if it goes against the grain of human nature.

Your habits are shaped by the systems in your life. In the chapters that follow,
we will discuss these laws one by one and show how you can use them to create
a system in which good habits emerge naturally and bad habits wither away.
THE 1ST LAW

Make It Obvious
4
The Man Who Didn’t Look Right

TH. esvcuoroaist Gary Klein once told me a story about a woman who attended a

family gathering. She had spent years working as a paramedic and, upon arriving
at the event, took one look at her father-in-law and got very concerned.

“T don’t like the way you look,” she said.

Her father-in-law, who was feeling perfectly fine, jokingly replied, “Well, I
don’t like your looks, either.”

“No,” she insisted. “You need to go to the hospital now.”

A few hours later, the man was undergoing lifesaving surgery after an
examination had revealed that he had a blockage to a major artery and was at
immediate risk of a heart attack. Without his daughter-in-law’s intuition, he
could have died.

What did the paramedic see? How did she predict his impending heart attack?

When major arteries are obstructed, the body focuses on sending blood to
critical organs and away from peripheral locations near the surface of the skin.
The result is a change in the pattern of distribution of blood in the face. After
many years of working with people with heart failure, the woman had
unknowingly developed the ability to recognize this pattern on sight. She
couldn’t explain what it was that she noticed in her father-in-law’s face, but she
knew something was wrong.

Similar stories exist in other fields. For example, military analysts can identify
which blip on a radar screen is an enemy missile and which one is a plane from
their own fleet even though they are traveling at the same speed, flying at the
same altitude, and look identical on radar in nearly every respect. During the
Gulf War, Lieutenant Commander Michael Riley saved an entire battleship
when he ordered a missile shot down—despite the fact that it looked exactly like
the battleship’s own planes on radar. He made the right call, but even his
superior officers couldn’t explain how he did it.
Museum curators have been known to discern the difference between an
authentic piece of art and an expertly produced counterfeit even though they
can’t tell you precisely which details tipped them off. Experienced radiologists
can look at a brain scan and predict the area where a stroke will develop before
any obvious signs are visible to the untrained eye. I’ve even heard of
hairdressers noticing whether a client is pregnant based only on the feel of her
hair.

The human brain is a prediction machine. It is continuously taking in your
surroundings and analyzing the information it comes across. Whenever you
experience something repeatedly—like a paramedic seeing the face of a heart
attack patient or a military analyst seeing a missile on a radar screen—your brain
begins noticing what is important, sorting through the details and highlighting
the relevant cues, and cataloging that information for future use.

With enough practice, you can pick up on the cues that predict certain
outcomes without consciously thinking about it. Automatically, your brain
encodes the lessons learned through experience. We can’t always explain what it
is we are learning, but learning is happening all along the way, and your ability
to notice the relevant cues in a given situation is the foundation for every habit
you have.

We underestimate how much our brains and bodies can do without thinking.
You do not tell your hair to grow, your heart to pump, your lungs to breathe, or
your stomach to digest. And yet your body handles all this and more on
autopilot. You are much more than your conscious self.

Consider hunger. How do you know when you’re hungry? You don’t
necessarily have to see a cookie on the counter to realize that it is time to eat.
Appetite and hunger are governed nonconsciously. Your body has a variety of
feedback loops that gradually alert you when it is time to eat again and that track
what is going on around you and within you. Cravings can arise thanks to
hormones and chemicals circulating through your body. Suddenly, you’re
hungry even though you’re not quite sure what tipped you off.

This is one of the most surprising insights about our habits: you don’t need to
be aware of the cue for a habit to begin. You can notice an opportunity and take
action without dedicating conscious attention to it. This is what makes habits
useful.

It’s also what Makes them dangerous. As habits form, your actions come
under the direction of your automatic and nonconscious mind. You fall into old
patterns before you realize what’s happening. Unless someone points it out, you
may not notice that you cover your mouth with your hand whenever you laugh,
that you apologize before asking a question, or that you have a habit of finishing
other people’s sentences. And the more you repeat these patterns, the less likely
you become to question what you’re doing and why you’re doing it.

I once heard of a retail clerk who was instructed to cut up empty gift cards
after customers had used up the balance on the card. One day, the clerk cashed
out a few customers in a row who purchased with gift cards. When the next
person walked up, the clerk swiped the customer’s actual credit card, picked up
the scissors, and then cut it in half—entirely on autopilot—before looking up at
the stunned customer and realizing what had just happened.

Another woman I came across in my research was a former preschool teacher
who had switched to a corporate job. Even though she was now working with
adults, her old habits would kick in and she kept asking coworkers if they had
washed their hands after going to the bathroom. I also found the story of a man
who had spent years working as a lifeguard and would occasionally yell “Walk!”
whenever he saw a child running.

Over time, the cues that spark our habits become so common that they are
essentially invisible: the treats on the kitchen counter, the remote control next to
the couch, the phone in our pocket. Our responses to these cues are so deeply

encoded that it may feel like the urge to act comes from nowhere. For this
reason, we must begin the process of behavior change with awareness,

Before we can effectively build new habits, we need to get a handle on our
current ones. This can be more challenging than it sounds because once a habit is
firmly rooted in your life, it is mostly nonconscious and automatic. If a habit
remains mindless, you can’t expect to improve it. As the psychologist Carl Jung
said, “Until you make the unconscious conscious, it will direct your life and you
will call it fate.”

THE HABITS SCORECARD

The Japanese railway system is regarded as one of the best in the world. If you
ever find yourself riding a train in Tokyo, you’ll notice that the conductors have
a peculiar habit.

As each operator runs the train, they proceed through a ritual of pointing at
different objects and calling out commands. When the train approaches a signal,
the operator will point at it and say, “Signal is green.” As the train pulls into and
out of each station, the operator will point at the speedometer and call out the
exact speed. When it’s time to leave, the operator will point at the timetable and
state the time. Out on the platform, other employees are performing similar
actions. Before each train departs, staff members will point along the edge of the
platform and declare, “All clear!” Every detail is identified, pointed at, and
named aloud.*

This process, known as Pointing-and-Calling, is a safety system designed to
reduce mistakes. It seems silly, but it works incredibly well. Pointing-and-
Calling reduces errors by up to 85 percent and cuts accidents by 30 percent. The
MTA subway system in New York City adopted a modified version that is
“point-only,” and “within two years of implementation, incidents of incorrectly
berthed subways fell 57 percent.”

Pointing-and-Calling is so effective because it raises the level of awareness
from a nonconscious habit to a more conscious level. Because the train operators
must use their eyes, hands, mouth, and ears, they are more likely to notice
problems before something goes wrong.

My wife does something similar. Whenever we are preparing to walk out the
door for a trip, she verbally calls out the most essential items in her packing list.
“ve got my keys. I’ve got my wallet. I’ve got my glasses. I’ve got my
husband.”

The more automatic a behavior becomes, the less likely we are to consciously
think about it. And when we’ve done something a thousand times before, we
begin to overlook things. We assume that the next time will be just like the last.
We’re so used to doing what we’ve always done that we don’t stop to question
whether it’s the right thing to do at all. Many of our failures in performance are
largely attributable to a lack of self-awareness.

One of our greatest challenges in changing habits is maintaining awareness of
what we are actually doing. This helps explain why the consequences of bad

habits can sneak up on us. We need a jipoint=and-Calle” System for "our personal

Here’s a sample of where your list might start:

Wake up

Turn off alarm
Check my phone
Go to the bathroom
Weigh myself
Take a shower
Brush my teeth
Floss my teeth
Put on deodorant
Hang up towel to dry
Get dressed

Make a cup of tea

...and so on.

Once you have a full list, look at each behavior, and ask yourself, “Is this a
good habit, a bad habit, or a neutral habit?” If it is a good habit, write “+” next to
it. If it is a bad habit, write “—’. If it is a neutral habit, write “=”.

For example, the list above might look like this:

Wake up =

Turn off alarm =
Check my phone —
Go to the bathroom =
Weigh myself +
Take a shower +
Brush my teeth +
Floss my teeth +

Put on deodorant +
Hang up towel to dry =
Get dressed =

Make a cup of tea +

The marks you give to a particular habit will depend on your situation and
your goals. For someone who is trying to lose weight, eating a bagel with peanut
butter every morning might be a bad habit. For someone who is trying to bulk up
and add muscle, the same behavior might be a good habit. It all depends on what
you’re working toward.*

Scoring your habits can be a bit more complex for another reason as well. The
labels “good habit” and “bad habit” are slightly inaccurate. There are no good
habits or bad habits. There are only effective habits. That is, effective at solving
problems. All habits serve you in some way—even the bad ones—which is why
you repeat them. For this exercise, categorize your habits by how they will
benefit you in the long run. Generally speaking, good habits will have net
positive outcomes. Bad habits have net negative outcomes. Smoking a cigarette
may reduce stress right now (that’s how it’s serving you), but it’s not a healthy
long-term behavior.

If you’re still having trouble determining how to rate a particular habit, here is
a question I like to use: “Does this behavior help me become the type of person I
wish to be? Does this habit cast a vote for or against my desired identity?”
Habits that reinforce your desired identity are usually good. Habits that conflict
with your desired identity are usually bad.

As you create your Habits Scorecard, there is no need to change anything at
first. The goal is to simply notice what is actually going on. Observe your
thoughts and actions without judgment or internal criticism. Don’t blame
yourself for your faults. Don’t praise yourself for your successes.

If you eat a chocolate bar every moming, acknowledge it, almost as if you
were watching someone else. Oh, how interesting that they would do such a
thing. If you binge-eat, simply notice that you are eating more calories than you
should. If you waste time online, notice that you are spending your life in a way
that you do not want to.

The first step to changing bad habits is to be on the lookout for them. Ifyou

Wwill)be! If you want to cut back on your junk food habit but notice yourself
grabbing another cookie, say out loud, “I’m about to eat this cookie, but I don’t
need it. Eating it will cause me to gain weight and hurt my health.”

Hearing your bad habits spoken aloud makes the consequences seem more
real. It adds weight to the action rather than letting yourself mindlessly slip into
an old routine. This approach is useful even if you’re simply trying to remember
a task on your to-do list. Just saying out loud, “Tomorrow, I need to go to the
post office after lunch,” increases the odds that you’ll actually do it. You’re
getting yourself to acknowledge the need for action—and that can make all the
difference.

The process of behavior change always starts with awareness. Strategies like
Pointing-and-Calling and the Habits Scorecard are focused on getting you to
recognize your habits and acknowledge the cues that trigger them, which makes
it possible to respond in a way that benefits you.
5
The Best Way to Start a New Habit

I. rot, nescarcuers IN Great Britain began working with 248 people to build better

exercise habits over the course of two weeks. The subjects were divided into
three groups.

The first group was the control group. They were simply asked to track how
often they exercised.

The second group was the “motivation” group. They were asked not only to
track their workouts but also to read some material on the benefits of exercise.
The researchers also explained to the group how exercise could reduce the risk
of coronary heart disease and improve heart health.

Finally, there was the third group. These subjects received the same
presentation as the second group, which ensured that they had equal levels of
motivation. However, they were also asked to formulate a plan for when and
where they would exercise over the following week. Specifically, each member
of the third group completed the following sentence: “During the next week, I
will partake in at least 20 minutes of vigorous exercise on [DAY] at [TIME] in
[PLACE].”

In the first and second groups, 35 to 38 percent of people exercised at least
once per week. (Interestingly, the motivational presentation given to the second
group seemed to have no meaningful impact on behavior.) But 91 percent of the
third group exercised at least once per week—more than double the normal rate.

The sentence they filled out is what researchers refer to as an implementation
intention, which is a plan you make beforehand about when and where to act.
That is, how you intend to implement a particular habit.

The cues that can trigger a habit come in a wide range of forms—the feel of
your phone buzzing in your pocket, the smell of chocolate chip cookies, the
sound of ambulance sirens—but the two most common cues are time and
location. Implementation intentions leverage both of these cues.
Broadly speaking, the format for creating an implementation intention is:
“When situation X arises, I will perform response Y.”

Hundreds of studies have shown that implementation intentions are effective
for sticking to our goals, whether it’s writing down the exact time and date of
when you will get a flu shot or recording the time of your colonoscopy
appointment. They increase the odds that people will stick with habits like
recycling, studying, going to sleep early, and stopping smoking.

Researchers have even found that voter turnout increases when people are
forced to create implementation intentions by answering questions like: “What
route are you taking to the polling station? At what time are you planning to go?
What bus will get you there?” Other successful government programs have
prompted citizens to make a clear plan to send taxes in on time or provided
directions on when and where to pay late traffic bills.

The punch line is clear: people who make a specific plan for when and where
they will perform a new habit are more likely to follow through. Too many
people try to change their habits without these basic details figured out. We tell
ourselves, “I’m going to eat healthier” or “I’m going to write more,” but we
never say when and where these habits are going to happen. We leave it up to
chance and hope that we will “just remember to do it” or feel motivated at the
right time. An implementation intention sweeps away foggy notions like “I want
to work out more” or “I want to be more productive” or “I should vote” and
transforms them into a concrete plan of action.

Many people think they lack motivation when what they really lack is clarity.
It is not always obvious when and where to take action. Some people spend their
entire lives waiting for the time to be right to make an improvement.

Once an implementation intention has been set, you don’t have to wait for
inspiration to strike. Do I write a chapter today or not? Do I meditate this
morning or at lunch? When the moment of action occurs, there is no need to
make a decision. Simply follow your predetermined plan.

The simple way to apply this strategy to your habits is to fill out this
sentence:
I will [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCATION].

° Meditation. I will meditate for one minute at 7 a.m. in my kitchen.
° Studying. I will study Spanish for twenty minutes at 6 p.m. in my

bedroom.
° Exercise. I will exercise for one hour at 5 p.m. in my local gym.
° Marriage. I will make my partner a cup of tea at 8 a.m. in the kitchen.

If you aren’t sure when to start your habit, try the first day of the week,
month, or year. People are more likely to take action at those times because hope
is usually higher. If we have hope, we have a reason to take action. A fresh start
feels motivating.

There is another benefit to implementation intentions. Being specific about
what you want and how you will achieve it helps you say no to things that derail
progress, distract your attention, and pull you off course. We often say yes to
little requests because we are not clear enough about what we need to be doing
instead. When your dreams are vague, it’s easy to rationalize little exceptions all
day long and never get around to the specific things you need to do to succeed.

Give your habits a time and a space to live in the world. The goal is to make
the time and location so obvious that, with enough repetition, you get an urge to
do the right thing at the right time, even if you can’t say why. As the writer

There are many ways to use implementation intentions in your life and work.

My favorite approach is one I learned from Stanford professor BJ Fogg and it is
a strategy I refer to as habit stacking.

HABIT STACKING: A SIMPLE PLAN TO OVERHAUL YOUR HABITS

The French philosopher Denis Diderot lived nearly his entire life in poverty, but
that all changed one day in 1765.

Diderot’s daughter was about to be married and he could not afford to pay for
the wedding. Despite his lack of wealth, Diderot was well known for his role as
the co-founder and writer of Encyclopédie, one of the most comprehensive
encyclopedias of the time. When Catherine the Great, the Empress of Russia,
heard of Diderot’s financial troubles, her heart went out to him. She was a book
lover and greatly enjoyed his encyclopedia. She offered to buy Diderot’s
personal library for £1,000—more than $150,000 today.* Suddenly, Diderot had
money to spare. With his new wealth, he not only paid for the wedding but also
acquired a scarlet robe for himself.

Diderot’s scarlet robe was beautiful. So beautiful, in fact, that he immediately
noticed how out of place it seemed when surrounded by his more common
possessions. He wrote that there was “no more coordination, no more unity, no
more beauty” between his elegant robe and the rest of his stuff.

Diderot soon felt the urge to upgrade his possessions. He replaced his rug with
one from Damascus. He decorated his home with expensive sculptures. He
bought a mirror to place above the mantel, and a better kitchen table. He tossed
aside his old straw chair for a leather one. Like falling dominoes, one purchase
led to the next.

Diderot’s behavior is not uncommon. In fact, the tendency for one purchase to
lead to another one has a name: the Diderot Effect. The Diderot Effect states that
obtaining a new possession often creates a spiral of consumption that leads to
additional purchases.

You can spot this pattern everywhere. You buy a dress and have to get new
shoes and earrings to match. You buy a couch and suddenly question the layout
of your entire living room. You buy a toy for your child and soon find yourself
purchasing all of the accessories that go with it. It’s a chain reaction of
purchases.

Many human behaviors follow this cycle. You often decide what to do next
based on what you have just finished doing. Going to the bathroom leads to
washing and drying your hands, which reminds you that you need to put the
dirty towels in the laundry, so you add laundry detergent to the shopping list, and
so on. No behavior happens in isolation. Each action becomes a cue that triggers
the next behavior.

Why is this important?

When it comes to building new habits, you can use the connectedness of
behavior to your advantage. One of the best ways to build a new habit is to
identify a current habit you already do each day and then stack your new
behavior on top. This is called habit stacking.

Habit stacking is a special form of an implementation intention. Rather than
pairing your new habit with a particular time and location, you pair it with a
current habit. This method, which was created by BJ Fogg as part of his Tiny
Habits program, can be used to design an obvious cue for nearly any habit.*

The habit stacking formula is:
“After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT].”
For example:

° Meditation. After I pour my cup of coffee each morning, I will
meditate for one minute.

° Exercise. After I take off my work shoes, I will immediately change
into my workout clothes.

° Gratitude. After I sit down to dinner, I will say one thing I’m grateful
for that happened today.
Marriage. After I get into bed at night, I will give my partner a kiss.

° Safety. After I put on my running shoes, I will text a friend or family

member where I am running and how long it will take.

The key is to tie your desired behavior into something you already do each
day. Once you have mastered this basic structure, you can begin to create larger
stacks by chaining small habits together. This allows you to take advantage of
the natural momentum that comes from one behavior leading into the next—a
positive version of the Diderot Effect.

HABIT STACKING
CUE CRAVING RESPONSE REWARD

HABIT 1 {->——_+——__}——|
HABIT 2 [|__|
HABIT 3 {—_+__

FIGURE 7: Habit stacking increases the likelihood that you’ll stick with a habit by stacking your new behavior on top of an old one. This process can be repeated to chain numerous habits
together, each one acting as the cue for the next.

Your morning routine habit stack might look like this:

1. After I pour my morning cup of coffee, I will meditate for sixty
seconds.

2. After I meditate for sixty seconds, I will write my to-do list for the
day.

3. After I write my to-do list for the day, I will immediately begin my
first task.

Or, consider this habit stack in the evening:
1. After I finish eating dinner, I will put my plate directly into the

dishwasher.
2. After I put my dishes away, I will immediately wipe down the counter.
3. After I wipe down the counter, I will set out my coffee mug for

tomorrow morning.

You can also insert new behaviors into the middle of your current routines.
For example, you may already have a morning routine that looks like this: Wake
up > Make my bed > Take a shower. Let’s say you want to develop the habit of
reading more each night. You can expand your habit stack and try something
like: Wake up > Make my bed > Place a book on my pillow > Take a shower.
Now, when you climb into bed each night, a book will be sitting there waiting
for you to enjoy.

Overall, habit stacking allows you to create a set of simple rules that guide
your future behavior. It’s like you always have a game plan for which action
should come next. Once you get comfortable with this approach, you can
develop general habit stacks to guide you whenever the situation is appropriate:

° Exercise. When I see a set of stairs, I will take them instead of using
the elevator.

° Social skills. When I walk into a party, I will introduce myself to
someone I don’t know yet.

° Finances. When I want to buy something over $100, I will wait
twenty-four hours before purchasing.

° Healthy eating. When I serve myself a meal, I will always put veggies
on my plate first.

° Minimalism. When I buy a new item, I will give something away.
(“One in, one out.”’)

° Mood. When the phone rings, I will take one deep breath and smile
before answering.

° Forgetfulness. When I leave a public place, I will check the table and

chairs to make sure I don’t leave anything behind.

No matter how you use this strategy, the secret to creating a successful habit
stack is selecting the right cue to kick things off. Unlike an implementation
intention, which specifically states the time and location for a given behavior,
habit stacking implicitly has the time and location built into it. When and where
you choose to insert a habit into your daily routine can make a big difference. If
you’re trying to add meditation into your morning routine but mornings are
chaotic and your kids keep running into the room, then that may be the wrong
place and time. Consider when you are most likely to be successful. Don’t ask
yourself to do a habit when you’re likely to be occupied with something else.

Your cue should also have the same frequency as your desired habit. If you
want to do a habit every day, but you stack it on top of a habit that only happens
on Mondays, that’s not a good choice.

One way to find the right trigger for your habit stack is by brainstorming a list
of your current habits. You can use your Habits Scorecard from the last chapter
as a Starting point. Alternatively, you can create a list with two columns. In the
first column, write down the habits you do each day without fail.*

For example:

Get out of bed.

Take a shower.

Brush your teeth.

Get dressed.

Brew a cup of coffee.
Eat breakfast.

Take the kids to school.
Start the work day.

Eat lunch.

End the work day.
Change out of work clothes.
Sit down for dinner.
Turn off the lights.

Get into bed.

Your list can be much longer, but you get the idea. In the second column,
write down all of the things that happen to you each day without fail. For
example:

° The sun rises.
e You get a text message.
° The song you are listening to ends.
° The sun sets.

Armed with these two lists, you can begin searching for the best place to layer
your new habit into your lifestyle.

Habit stacking works best when the cue is highly specific and immediately
actionable. Many people select cues that are too vague. I made this mistake
myself. When I wanted to start a push-up habit, my habit stack was “When I take
a break for lunch, I will do ten push-ups.” At first glance, this sounded
reasonable. But soon, I realized the trigger was unclear. Would I do my push-ups
before I ate lunch? After I ate lunch? Where would I do them? After a few
inconsistent days, I changed my habit stack to: “When I close my laptop for
lunch, I will do ten push-ups next to my desk.” Ambiguity gone.

Habits like “read more” or “eat better” are worthy causes, but these goals do
not provide instruction on how and when to act. Be specific and clear: After I
close the door. After I brush my teeth. After I sit down at the table. The
specificity is important. The more tightly bound your new habit is to a specific
cue, the better the odds are that you will notice when the time comes to act.

The 1st Law of Behavior Change is to make it obvious. Strategies like
implementation intentions and habit stacking are among the most practical ways
to create obvious cues for your habits and design a clear plan for when and
where to take action.
6

Motivation Is Overrated; Environment Often
Matters More

AN. Troxwwae, « primary care physician at Massachusetts General Hospital in

Boston, had a crazy idea. She believed she could improve the eating habits of
thousands of hospital staff and visitors without changing their willpower or
motivation in the slightest way. In fact, she didn’t plan on talking to them at all.

Thorndike and her colleagues designed a six-month study to alter the “choice
architecture” of the hospital cafeteria. They started by changing how drinks were
arranged in the room. Originally, the refrigerators located next to the cash
registers in the cafeteria were filled with only soda. The researchers added water
as an option to each one. Additionally, they placed baskets of bottled water next
to the food stations throughout the room. Soda was still in the primary
refrigerators, but water was now available at all drink locations.

Over the next three months, the number of soda sales at the hospital dropped
by 11.4 percent. Meanwhile, sales of bottled water increased by 25.8 percent.
They made similar adjustments—and saw similar results—with the food in the
cafeteria. Nobody had said a word to anyone eating there.

BEFORE AFTER
ENTRANCE ENTRANCE

FIGURE 8: Here is a representation of what the cafeteria looked like before the environment design changes were made (left) and after (right). The shaded boxes indicate areas where bottled
water was available in each instance. Because the amount of water in the environment was increased, behavior shifted naturally and without additional motivation.

People often choose products not because of what they are, but because of
where they are. If I walk into the kitchen and see a plate of cookies on the
counter, I’ll pick up half a dozen and start eating, even if I hadn’t been thinking
about them beforehand and didn’t necessarily feel hungry. If the communal table
at the office is always filled with doughnuts and bagels, it’s going to be hard not
to grab one every now and then. Your habits change depending on the room you
are in and the cues in front of you.

Environment is the invisible hand that shapes human behavior. Despite our
unique personalities, certain behaviors tend to arise again and again under
certain environmental conditions. In church, people tend to talk in whispers. On
a dark street, people act wary and guarded. In this way, the most common form
of change is not internal, but external: we are changed by the world around us.
Every habit is context dependent.

In 1936, psychologist Kurt Lewin wrote a simple equation that makes a
powerful statement: Behavior is a function of the Person in their Environment,
or B =f (P,E).

It didn’t take long for Lewin’s Equation to be tested in business. In 1952, the
economist Hawkins Stern described a phenomenon he called Suggestion Impulse
Buying, which “is triggered when a shopper sees a product for the first time and
visualizes a need for it.” In other words, customers will occasionally buy
products not because they want them but because of how they are presented to
them.

For example, items at eye level tend to be purchased more than those down
near the floor. For this reason, you’ll find expensive brand names featured in
easy-to-reach locations on store shelves because they drive the most profit, while
cheaper alternatives are tucked away in harder-to-reach spots. The same goes for
end caps, which are the units at the end of aisles. End caps are moneymaking
machines for retailers because they are obvious locations that encounter a lot of
foot traffic. For example, 45 percent of Coca-Cola sales come specifically from
end-of-the-aisle racks.

The more obviously available a product or service is, the more likely you are
to try it. People drink Bud Light because it is in every bar and visit Starbucks
because it is on every corner. We like to think that we are in control. If we
choose water over soda, we assume it is because we wanted to do so. The truth,
however, is that many of the actions we take each day are shaped not by
purposeful drive and choice but by the most obvious option.

Every living being has its own methods for sensing and understanding the
world. Eagles have remarkable long-distance vision. Snakes can smell by
“tasting the air” with their highly sensitive tongues. Sharks can detect small
amounts of electricity and vibrations in the water caused by nearby fish. Even
bacteria have chemoreceptors—tiny sensory cells that allow them to detect toxic
chemicals in their environment.

In humans, perception is directed by the sensory nervous system. We perceive
the world through sight, sound, smell, touch, and taste. But we also have other
ways of sensing stimuli. Some are conscious, but many are nonconscious. For
instance, you can “notice” when the temperature drops before a storm, or when
the pain in your gut rises during a stomachache, or when you fall off balance
while walking on rocky ground. Receptors in your body pick up on a wide range
of internal stimuli, such as the amount of salt in your blood or the need to drink
when thirsty.

The most powerful of all human sensory abilities, however, is vision. The
human body has about eleven million sensory receptors. Approximately ten
million of those are dedicated to sight. Some experts estimate that half of the
brain’s resources are used on vision. Given that we are more dependent on vision
than on any other sense, it should come as no surprise that visual cues are the
greatest catalyst of our behavior. For this reason, a small change in what you see
can lead to a big shift in what you do. As a result, you can imagine how
important it is to live and work in environments that are filled with productive
cues and devoid of unproductive ones.

Thankfully, there is good news in this respect. You don’t have to be the victim
of your environment. You can also be the architect of it.

HOW TO DESIGN YOUR ENVIRONMENT FOR SUCCESS

During the energy crisis and oil embargo of the 1970s, Dutch researchers began
to pay close attention to the country’s energy usage. In one suburb near
Amsterdam, they found that some homeowners used 30 percent less energy than
their neighbors—despite the homes being of similar size and getting electricity
for the same price.

It turned out the houses in this neighborhood were nearly identical except for
one feature: the location of the electrical meter. Some had one in the basement.
Others had the electrical meter upstairs in the main hallway. As you may guess,
the homes with the meters located in the main hallway used less electricity.
When their energy use was obvious and easy to track, people changed their
behavior.

Every habit is initiated by a cue, and we are more likely to notice cues that
stand out. Unfortunately, the environments where we live and work often make
it easy not to do certain actions because there is no obvious cue to trigger the
behavior. It’s easy not to practice the guitar when it’s tucked away in the closet.
It’s easy not to read a book when the bookshelf is in the corner of the guest
room. It’s easy not to take your vitamins when they are out of sight in the pantry.
When the cues that spark a habit are subtle or hidden, they are easy to ignore.

By comparison, creating obvious visual cues can draw your attention toward a
desired habit. In the early 1990s, the cleaning staff at Schiphol Airport in
Amsterdam installed a small sticker that looked like a fly near the center of each
urinal. Apparently, when men stepped up to the urinals, they aimed for what they
thought was a bug. The stickers improved their aim and significantly reduced
“spillage” around the urinals. Further analysis determined that the stickers cut
bathroom cleaning costs by 8 percent per year.

I’ve experienced the power of obvious cues in my own life. I used to buy
apples from the store, put them in the crisper in the bottom of the refrigerator,
and forget all about them. By the time I remembered, the apples would have
gone bad. I never saw them, so I never ate them.

Eventually, I took my own advice and redesigned my environment. I bought a
large display bowl and placed it in the middle of the kitchen counter. The next
time I bought apples, that was where they went—out in the open where I could
see them. Almost like magic, I began eating a few apples each day simply
because they were obvious rather than out of sight.
Here are a few ways you can redesign your environment and make the cues
for your preferred habits more obvious:

If you want to make a habit a big part of your life, make the cue a big part of
your environment. The most persistent behaviors usually have multiple cues.
Consider how many different ways a smoker could be prompted to pull out a
cigarette: driving in the car, seeing a friend smoke, feeling stressed at work, and
so on.

The same strategy can be employed for good habits. By sprinkling triggers
throughout your surroundings, you increase the odds that you’ll think about your
habit throughout the day. Make sure the best choice is the most obvious one.
Making a better decision is easy and natural when the cues for good habits are
right in front of you.

. Most people live in a world
others have created for them. But you can alter the spaces where you live and
work to increase your exposure to positive cues and reduce your exposure to
negative ones.

THE CONTEXT IS THE CUE

For example, many people drink more in social situations than they would
ever drink alone. The trigger is rarely a single cue, but rather the whole situation:
watching your friends order drinks, hearing the music at the bar, seeing the beers
on tap.

We mentally assign our habits to the locations in which they occur: the home,
the office, the gym. Each location develops a connection to certain habits and
routines. You establish a particular relationship with the objects on your desk,
the items on your kitchen counter, the things in your bedroom.

Our behavior is not defined by the objects in the environment but by our
relationship to them. In fact, this is a useful way to think about the influence of
the environment on your behavior. Stop thinking about your environment as
filled with objects. Start thinking about it as filled with relationships. Think in
terms of how you interact with the spaces around you. For one person, her couch
is the place where she reads for an hour each night. For someone else, the couch
is where he watches television and eats a bowl of ice cream after work. Different
people can have different memories—and thus different habits—associated with
the same place.

The good news? You can train yourself to link a particular habit with a
particular context.

In one study,

The power of context also reveals an important strategy: habits can be easier
to change in a new environment. It helps to escape the subtle triggers and cues
that nudge you toward your current habits. Go to a new place—a different coffee
shop, a bench in the park, a corner of your room you seldom use—and create a
new routine there.

, you leave your behavioral
biases behind. You aren’t battling old environmental cues, which allows new
habits to form without interruption.

Want to think more creatively? Move to a bigger room, a rooftop patio, or a
building with expansive architecture. Take a break from the space where you do
your daily work, which is also linked to your current thought patterns.
When I started my career as an entrepreneur, I would often work from my
couch or at the kitchen table. In the evenings, I found it very difficult to stop
working. There was no clear division between the end of work time and the
beginning of personal time. Was the kitchen table my office or the space where I
ate meals?

A few years later, I could finally afford to move to a home with a separate
room for my office. Suddenly, work was something that happened “in here” and
personal life was something that happened “out there.”

Whenever possible, avoid mixing the context of one habit with another. When
you start mixing contexts, you’ll start mixing habits—and the easier ones will
usually win out. This is one reason why the versatility of modern technology is
both a strength and a weakness. You can use your phone for all sorts of tasks,
which makes it a powerful device. But when you can use your phone to do
nearly anything, it becomes hard to associate it with one task. You want to be
productive, but you’re also conditioned to browse social media, check email, and
play video games whenever you open your phone. It’s a mishmash of cues.

You may be thinking, “You don’t understand. I live in New York City. My
apartment is the size of a smartphone. I need each room to play multiple roles.”
Fair enough. If your space is limited, divide your room into activity zones: a
chair for reading, a desk for writing, a table for eating. You can do the same with
your digital spaces. I know a writer who uses his computer only for writing, his
tablet only for reading, and his phone only for social media and texting. Every
habit should have a home.

If you can manage to stick with this strategy, each context will become
associated with a particular habit and mode of thought. Habits thrive under
predictable circumstances like these. Focus comes automatically when you are
sitting at your work desk. Relaxation is easier when you are in a space designed
for that purpose. Sleep comes quickly when it is the only thing that happens in
your bedroom. If you want behaviors that are stable and predictable, you need an
environment that is stable and predictable.
Chapter Summary

7

The Secret to Self-Control

I, wn, aS the Vietnam War was heading into its sixteenth year, congressmen

Robert Steele from Connecticut and Morgan Murphy from Illinois made a
discovery that stunned the American public. While visiting the troops, they had
learned that over 15 percent of U.S. soldiers stationed there were heroin addicts.
Follow-up research revealed that 35 percent of service members in Vietnam had
tried heroin and as many as 20 percent were addicted—the problem was even
worse than they had initially thought.

The discovery led to a flurry of activity in Washington, including the creation
of the Special Action Office of Drug Abuse Prevention under President Nixon to
promote prevention and rehabilitation and to track addicted service members
when they returned home.

Lee Robins was one of the researchers in charge. In a finding that completely
upended the accepted beliefs about addiction, Robins found that when soldiers
who had been heroin users returned home, only 5 percent of them became
readdicted within a year, and just 12 percent relapsed within three years. In other
words, approximately nine out of ten soldiers who used heroin in Vietnam
eliminated their addiction nearly overnight.

This finding contradicted the prevailing view at the time, which considered
heroin addiction to be a permanent and irreversible condition. Instead, Robins
revealed that addictions could spontaneously dissolve if there was a radical
change in the environment: In Vietnam, soldiers spent all day surrounded by
cues triggering heroin use: it was easy to access, they were engulfed by the
constant stress of war, they built friendships with fellow soldiers who were also
heroin users, and they were thousands of miles from home. Once a soldier
returned to the United States, though, he found himself in an environment devoid
of those triggers. When the context changed, so did the habit.

Compare this situation to that of a typical drug user. Someone becomes
addicted at home or with friends, goes to a clinic to get clean—which is devoid
of all the environmental stimuli that prompt their habit—then returns to their old
neighborhood with all of their previous cues that caused them to get addicted in
the first place. It’s no wonder that usually you see numbers that are the exact
opposite of those in the Vietnam study. Typically, 90 percent of heroin users
become readdicted once they return home from rehab.

The Vietnam studies ran counter to many of our cultural beliefs about bad
habits because it challenged the conventional association of unhealthy behavior
as a moral weakness. If you’re overweight, a smoker, or an addict, you’ve been
told your entire life that it is because you lack self-control—maybe even that
you’re a bad person. The idea that a little bit of discipline would solve all our
problems is deeply embedded in our culture.

Recent research, however, shows something different. When scientists
analyze people who appear to have tremendous self-control, it turns out those
individuals aren’t all that different from those who are struggling. Instead,
“disciplined” people are better at structuring their lives in a way that does not

require heroic willpower and self-controlf/In other words, they spend less time in

The people with the best self-control are typically the ones who need to use it
the least. It’s easier to practice self-restraint when you don’t have to use it very

often. So, yes, perseverance, grit, and willpower are essential to success, but the

This counterintuitive idea makes even more sense once you understand what
happens when a habit is formed in the brain. A habit that has been encoded in
the mind is ready to be used whenever the relevant situation arises. When Patty
Olwell, a therapist from Austin, Texas, started smoking, she would often light up
while riding horses with a friend. Eventually, she quit smoking and avoided it
for years. She had also stopped riding. Decades later, she hopped on a horse
again and found herself craving a cigarette for the first time in forever. The cues
were still internalized; she just hadn’t been exposed to them in a long time.

Once a habit has been encoded, the urge to act follows whenever the
environmental cues reappear. This is one reason behavior change techniques can

backfire. Shaming obese people with weight-loss presentations can make them
feel stressed, and as a result many people return to their favorite coping strategy:

overeating. Showing pictures of blackened lungs to smokers leads to higher
levels of anxiety, which drives many people to reach for a cigarette. If you're not
careful about cues, you can cause the very behavior you want to stop.

Bad habits are autocatalytic: the process feeds itself. They foster the feelings
they try to numb. You feel bad, so you eat junk food. Because you eat junk food,
you feel bad. Watching television makes you feel sluggish, so you watch more
television because you don’t have the energy to do anything else. Worrying
about your health makes you feel anxious, which causes you to smoke to ease
your anxiety, which makes your health even worse and soon you’re feeling more
anxious. It’s a downward spiral, a runaway train of bad habits.

Researchers refer to this phenomenon as “cue-induced wanting”: an external
trigger causes a compulsive craving to repeat a bad habit. Once you notice
something, you begin to want it. This process is happening all the time—often
without us realizing it. Scientists have found that showing addicts a picture of
cocaine for just thirty-three milliseconds stimulates the reward pathway in the
brain and sparks desire. This speed is too fast for the brain to consciously
register—the addicts couldn’t even tell you what they had seen—but they craved
the drug all the same.

Here’s the punch line: You can break a habit, but you’re unlikely to forget it.
Once the mental grooves of habit have been carved into your brain, they are
nearly impossible to remove entirely—even if they go unused for quite a while.
And that means that simply resisting temptation is an ineffective strategy. It is
hard to maintain a Zen attitude in a life filled with interruptions. It takes too
much energy. In the short-run, you can choose to overpower temptation. In the
long-run, we become a product of the environment that we live in. To put it
bluntly, I have never seen someone consistently stick to positive habits in a
negative environment.

A more reliable approach is to cut bad habits off at the source. One of the
most practical ways to eliminate a bad habit is to reduce exposure to the cue that
causes it.

° If you can’t seem to get any work done, leave your phone in another
room for a few hours.

° If you’re continually feeling like you’re not enough, stop following
social media accounts that trigger jealousy and envy.

° If you’re wasting too much time watching television, move the TV out
of the bedroom.

° If you’re spending too much money on electronics, quit reading
reviews of the latest tech gear.

° If you’re playing too many video games, unplug the console and put it

in a closet after each use.
This practice is an inversion of the 1st Law of Behavior Change. Rather than
make it obvious, you can make it invisible. I’m often surprised by how effective
simple changes like these can be. Remove a single cue and the entire habit often
fades away.

Self-control is a short-term strategy, not a long-term one. You may be able to
resist temptation once or twice, but it’s unlikely you can muster the willpower to
override your desires every time. Instead of summoning a new dose of willpower
whenever you want to do the right thing, your energy would be better spent
optimizing your environment. This is the secret to self-control. Make the cues of
your good habits obvious and the cues of your bad habits invisible.
Chapter Summary

HOW TO CREATE A GOOD HABIT

ake It Obvious|

1.4 Fil out the Habits Scorecard, Write down your curent habits to become aware of them,
1.2: Use implementation intentions “Twi [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in {LOCATION,”
1.3: Use habit stackngs “After [CURRENT HABIT], I wil [NEW HABIT)”

14 Design your environment. Make the cues of good habits obvious an visible

‘The 2nd LawgMake It Attractive
‘The 3rd LawgMake It Easy|
he 4th LawgMake It Satisfying

HOW TO BREAK A BAD HABIT

Inversion of the 1st LawgMake It Invisible}

1.5: Reduce exposure. Remove the cues of your bad habits from your environment.

Inversion of the 2nd LawgMake It Unattractive
mversion of the 3rd La’ ake It Difficul
Inversion of the 4th Lawg™Make It Unsatisfying

You can download a printable version of this habits cheat sheet at: atomichabits.com/cheatsheet
THE 2ND LAW

Make It Attractive
8

How to Make a Habit Irresistible

I. me 1s, a Dutch scientist named Niko Tinbergen performed a series of

experiments that transformed our understanding of what motivates us. Tinbergen
—who eventually won a Nobel Prize for his work—was investigating herring
gulls, the gray and white birds often seen flying along the seashores of North
America.

Adult herring gulls have a small red dot on their beak, and Tinbergen noticed
that newly hatched chicks would peck this spot whenever they wanted food. To
begin one experiment, he created a collection of fake cardboard beaks, just a
head without a body. When the parents had flown away, he went over to the nest
and offered these dummy beaks to the chicks. The beaks were obvious fakes,
and he assumed the baby birds would reject them altogether.

However, when the tiny gulls saw the red spot on the cardboard beak, they
pecked away just as if it were attached to their own mother. They had a clear
preference for those red spots—as if they had been genetically programmed at
birth. Soon Tinbergen discovered that the bigger the red spot, the faster the
chicks pecked. Eventually, he created a beak with three large red dots on it.
When he placed it over the nest, the baby birds went crazy with delight. They
pecked at the little red patches as if it was the greatest beak they had ever seen.

Tinbergen and his colleagues discovered similar behavior in other animals.
For example, the greylag goose is a ground-nesting bird. Occasionally, as the
mother moves around on the nest, one of the eggs will roll out and settle on the
grass nearby. Whenever this happens, the goose will waddle over to the egg and
use its beak and neck to pull it back into the nest.

Tinbergen discovered that the goose will pull any nearby round object, such as
a billiard ball or a lightbulb, back into the nest. The bigger the object, the greater
their response. One goose even made a tremendous effort to roll a volleyball
back and sit on top. Like the baby gulls automatically pecking at red dots, the
greylag goose was following an instinctive rule: When I see a round object
nearby, I must roll it back into the nest. The bigger the round object, the harder I
should try to get it.

and when it comes across an exaggerated version of that rule, it lights up like a
Christmas tree. Scientists refer to these exaggerated cues as supernormal stimuli.
A ike a beak with
three red dots or an egg the size of a volleyball—and it elicits a stronger
résponse than usual.

Humans are also prone to fall for exaggerated versions of reality. Junk food,
for example, drives our reward systems into a frenzy. After spending hundreds
of thousands of years hunting and foraging for food in the wild, the human brain
has evolved to place a high value on salt, sugar, and fat. Such foods are often
calorie-dense and they were quite rare when our ancient ancestors were roaming
the savannah. When you don’t know where your next meal is coming from,
eating as much as possible is an excellent strategy for survival.

Today, however, we live in a calorie-rich environment. Food is abundant, but
your brain continues to crave it like it is scarce. Placing a high value on salt,
sugar, and fat is no longer advantageous to our health, but the craving persists
because the brain’s reward centers have not changed for approximately fifty
thousand years. The modern food industry relies on stretching our Paleolithic
instincts beyond their evolutionary purpose.

A primary goal of food science is to create products that are more attractive to
consumers. Nearly every food in a bag, box, or jar has been enhanced in some
way, if only with additional flavoring. Companies spend millions of dollars to
discover the most satisfying level of crunch in a potato chip or the perfect
amount of fizz in a soda. Entire departments are dedicated to optimizing how a
product feels in your mouth—a quality known as orosensation. French fries, for
example, are a potent combination—golden brown and crunchy on the outside,
light and smooth on the inside.

Other processed foods enhance dynamic contrast, which refers to items with a
combination of sensations, like crunchy and creamy. Imagine the gooeyness of
melted cheese on top of a crispy pizza crust, or the crunch of an Oreo cookie
combined with its smooth center. With natural, unprocessed foods, you tend to
experience the same sensations over and over—how’s that seventeenth bite of
kale taste? After a few minutes, your brain loses interest and you begin to feel
full. But foods that are high in dynamic contrast keep the experience novel and
interesting, encouraging you to eat more.

Ultimately, such strategies enable food scientists to find the “bliss point” for

each product—the precise combination of salt, sugar, and fat that excites your
brain and keeps you coming back for more. The result, of course, is that you
overeat because hyperpalatable foods are more attractive to the human brain. As
Stephan Guyenet, a neuroscientist who specializes in eating behavior and
obesity, says, “We’ve gotten too good at pushing our own buttons.”

Look around.

Stores feature
mannequins with exaggerated hips and breasts to sell clothes. Social media
delivers more “likes” and praise in a few minutes than we could ever get in the
office or at home. Online porn splices together stimulating scenes at a rate that
would be impossible to replicate in real life. Advertisements are created with a
combination of ideal lighting, professional makeup, and Photoshopped edits—
even the model doesn’t look like the person in the final image. These are the
supernormal stimuli of our modern world. They exaggerate features that are
naturally attractive to us, and our instincts go wild as a result, driving us into
excessive shopping habits, social media habits, porn habits, eating habits, and
many others.

If history serves as a guide, the opportunities of the future will be more
attractive than those of today. The trend is for rewards to become more
concentrated and stimuli to become more enticing. Junk food is a more
concentrated form of calories than natural foods. Hard liquor is a more
concentrated form of alcohol than beer. Video games are a more concentrated
form of play than board games. Compared to nature, these pleasure-packed
experiences are hard to resist. We have the brains of our ancestors but
temptations they never had to face.

If you want to increase the odds that a behavior will occur, then you need to
make it attractive.

We begin by exa
dopamine spike.

THE DOPAMINE-DRIVEN FEEDBACK LOOP
Scientists can track the precise moment a craving occurs by measuring a
neurotransmitter called dopamine.* The importance of dopamine became
apparent in 1954 when the neuroscientists James Olds and Peter Milner ran an
experiment that revealed the neurological processes behind craving and desire.
By implanting electrodes in the brains of rats, the researchers blocked the release
of dopamine. To the surprise of the scientists, the rats lost all will to live. They
wouldn’t eat. They wouldn’t have sex. They didn’t crave anything. Within a few
days, the animals died of thirst.

In follow-up studies, other scientists also inhibited the dopamine-releasing
parts of the brain, but this time, they squirted little droplets of sugar into the
mouths of the dopamine-depleted rats. Their little rat faces lit up with
pleasurable grins from the tasty substance. Even though dopamine was blocked,
they liked the sugar just as much as before; they just didn’t want it anymore. Thé

When other researchers reversed this process and flooded the reward system
of the brain with dopamine, animals performed habits at breakneck speed. In one
study, mice received a powerful hit of dopamine each time they poked their nose
in a box. Within minutes, the mice developed a craving so strong they began
poking their nose into the box eight hundred times per hour. (Humans are not so
different: the average slot machine player will spin the wheel six hundred times
per hour.)

The same can be

’

When it comes to habits, the key takeaway is this:

Gambling
addicts have a dopamine spike right before they place a bet, not after they win.
Cocaine addicts get a surge of dopamine when they see the powder, not after
they take it. Whenever you predict that an opportunity will be rewarding, your
levels of dopamine spike in anticipation. And whenever dopamine rises, so does
your motivation to act.

[tis the anticipation of a reward—not the fulfillment of it—that gets us to take
action.

Interestingly, the reward system that is activated in the brain when you receive
a reward is the same system that is activated when you anticipate a reward. This
is one reason the anticipation of an experience can often feel better than the

attainment of i As a child, thinking about Christmas morning can be better than

THE DOPAMINE SPIKE
CRAVING {RESPONSE] REWARD

B) — ok

FIGURE 9: Before a habit is learned (A), dopamine is released when the reward is experienced for the first time. The next time around (B), dopamine rises before taking action, immediately
after a cue is recognized. This spike leads to a feeling of desire and a craving to take action whenever the cue is spotted. Once a habit is learned, dopamine will not rise when a reward is
experienced because you already expect the reward. However, if you see a cue and expect a reward, but do not get one, then dopamine will drop in disappointment (C). The sensitivity of the
dopamine response can clearly be seen when a reward is provided late (D). First, the cue is identified and dopamine rises as a craving builds. Next, a response is taken but the reward does not
come as quickly as expected and dopamine begins to drop. Finally, when the reward comes a little later than you had hoped, dopamine spikes again. It is as if the brain is saying, “See! I
knew I was right. Don’t forget to repeat this action next time.”

Your brain has far more neural circuitry allocated for wanting rewards than
for liking them. The wanting centers in the brain are large: the brain stem, the
nucleus accumbens, the ventral tegmental area, the dorsal striatum, the
amygdala, and portions of the prefrontal cortex. By /¢omparison, the liking

The fact that the brain allocates so much precious space to the regions
responsible for craving and desire provides further evidence of the crucial role
these processes play.

These insights reveal the importance of the 2nd Law of Behavior Change. Wé

HOW TO USE TEMPTATION BUNDLING TO MAKE YOUR HABITS
MORE ATTRACTIVE

Ronan Byrne, an electrical engineering student in Dublin, Ireland, enjoyed
watching Netflix, but he also knew that he should exercise more often than he
did. Putting his engineering skills to use, Byrne hacked his stationary bike and
connected it to his laptop and television. Then he wrote a computer program that
would allow Netflix to run only if he was cycling at a certain speed. If he slowed
down for too long, whatever show he was watching would pause until he started
pedaling again. He was, in the words of one fan, “eliminating obesity one Netflix
binge at a time.”

He was also employing temptation bundling to make his exercise habit more
attractive. Temptation bundling works by linking an action you want to do with
an action you need to do. In Byrne’s case,

Businesses are masters at temptation bundling. For instance, when the
American Broadcasting Company, more commonly known as ABC, launched its
Thursday-night television lineup for the 2014-2015 season, they promoted
temptation bundling on a massive scale.

Every Thursday, the company would air three shows created by screenwriter
Shonda Rhimes—Grey’s Anatomy, Scandal, and How to Get Away with Murder.
They branded it as “TGIT on ABC” (TGIT stands for Thank God It’s Thursday).
In addition to promoting the shows, ABC encouraged viewers to make popcorn,
drink red wine, and enjoy the evening.

Andrew Kubitz, head of scheduling for ABC, described the idea behind the
campaign: “We see Thursday night as a viewership opportunity, with either
couples or women by themselves who want to sit down and escape and have fun
and drink their red wine and have some popcorn.” The brilliance of this strategy
is that ABC was associating the thing they needed viewers to do (watch their
shows) with activities their viewers already wanted to do (relax, drink wine, and
eat popcorn).

Over time, people began to connect watching ABC with feeling relaxed and
entertained. If you drink red wine and eat popcorn at 8 p.m. every Thursday,
then eventually “8 p.m. on Thursday” means relaxation and entertainment. The
reward gets associated with the cue, and the habit of turning on the television
becomes more attractive.

You’re more likely to find a behavior attractive if you get to do one of your
favorite things at the same time. Perhaps you want to hear about the latest
celebrity gossip, but you need to get in shape. Using temptation bundling, you
could only read the tabloids and watch reality shows at the gym. Maybe you
want to get a pedicure, but you need to clean out your email inbox. Solution:
only get a pedicure while processing overdue work emails.

Temptation bundling is one way to apply a psychology theory known as
Premack’s Principle. Named after the work of professor David Premack, the
principle states that “more probable behaviors will reinforce less probable
behaviors.” In other words, even if you don’t really want to process overdue
work emails, you’ll become conditioned to do it if it means you get to do
something you really want to do along the way.

You can even combine temptation bundling with the habit stacking strategy
we discussed in Chapter 5 to create a set of rules to guide your behavior.

1.

If you want to read the news, but you need to express more gratitude:
1. After I get my morning coffee, I will say one thing I’m grateful for
that happened yesterday (need).
2. After I say one thing I’m grateful for, I will read the news (want).

If you want to watch sports, but you need to make sales calls:

1. After I get back from my lunch break, I will call three potential clients
(need).
2. After I call three potential clients, I will check ESPN (want).

If you want to check Facebook, but you need to exercise more:

1. After I pull out my phone, I will do ten burpees (need).
2. After I do ten burpees, I will check Facebook (want).

The hope is that eventually you’ll look forward to calling three clients or
doing ten burpees because it means you get to read the latest sports news or
check Facebook. Doing the thing you need to do means you get to do the thing
you want to do.

We began this chapter by discussing supernormal stimuli, which are
heightened versions of reality that increase our desire to take action. Temptation
bundling is one way to create a heightened version of any habit by connecting it

with something you already want. Engineering/ajtruly irresistible habitis/ajhard
task, but this simple strategy can be employed to make nearly any habit more
attractive than it would be otherwise.
Chapter Summary
9
The Role of Family and Friends in Shaping Your
Habits

I. ws, €@ Hungarian man named Laszlo Polgar wrote a series of strange letters to a

woman named Klara.

Laszlo believed in this idea so strongly that he wanted to test it with his own
children—and he was writing to Klara because he “needed a wife willing to
jump on board.” Klara was a teacher and, although she may not have been as

adamant as Laszlo, she also believed that with proper instruction) anyone could

Laszlo decided chess would be a suitable field for the experiment, and he laid
out a plan to raise his children to become chess prodigies. The kids would be
home-schooled, a rarity in Hungary at the time.

Laszlo successfully courted Klara, and within a few years, the Polgars were
parents to three young girls: Susan, Sofia, and Judit.

Susan, the oldest, began playing chess when she was four years old. Within
six months, she was defeating adults.

Sofia, the middle child, did even better. By fourteen, she was a world
champion, and a few years later, she became a grandmaster.

Judit, the youngest, was the best of all. By age five, she could beat her father.
At twelve, she was the youngest player ever listed among the top one hundred

chess players in the world. At fifteen years and four months old, she became the
youngest grandmaster of all time—younger than Bobby Fischer, the previous
record holder. For twenty-seven years, she was the number-one-ranked female
chess player in the world.

The childhood of the Polgar sisters was atypical, to say the least. And yet, if
you ask them about it, they claim their lifestyle was attractive, even enjoyable. In
interviews, the sisters talk about their childhood as entertaining rather than
grueling. They loved playing chess. They couldn’t get enough of it. Once, Laszlo
reportedly found Sofia playing chess in the bathroom in the middle of the night.
Encouraging her to go back to sleep, he said, “Sofia, leave the pieces alone!” To
which she replied, “Daddy, they won’t leave me alone!”

The Polgar sisters grew up in a culture that prioritized chess above all else—
praised them for it, rewarded them for it. In their world, an obsession with chess
was normal. And as we are about to see, whatever habits are normal in your
culture are among the most attractive behaviors you’ll find.

THE SEDUCTIVE PULL OF SOCIAL NORMS

Humans are herd animals. We want to fit in, to bond with others, and to earn the
respect and approval of our peers. Such inclinations are essential to our survival.
For most of our evolutionary history, our ancestors lived in tribes. Becoming
separated from the tribe—or worse, being cast out—was a death sentence. “The
lone wolf dies, but the pack survives.”*

Meanwhile, those who collaborated and bonded with others enjoyed increased
safety, mating opportunities, and access to resources. As Charles Darwin noted,
“In the long history of humankind, those who learned to collaborate and
improvise most effectively have prevailed.” As a result, one of the deepest
human desires is to belong. And this ancient preference exerts a powerful
influence on our modern behavior.

We don’t choose our earliest habits, we imitate them. We follow the script
handed down by our friends and family, our church or school, our local
community and society at large. Each of these cultures and groups comes with
its own set of expectations and standards—when and whether to get married,
how many children to have, which holidays to celebrate, how much money to

spend on your child’s birthday party. Injmany ways) these’social/norms/arejthe
invisible rules that guide your behavior each day. You’re always keeping them
in mind, even if they are at the not top of your mind. Often, you follow the habits
of your culture without thinking, without questioning, and sometimes without

femembering As the French philosopher Michel de Montaigne wrote, “The
customs and practices of life in society sweep us along.”

Most of the time, going along with the group does not feel like a burden.
Everyone wants to belong. If you grow up in a family that rewards you for your
chess skills, playing chess will seem like a very attractive thing to do. If you
work in a job where everyone wears expensive suits, then you’ll be inclined to
splurge on one as well. If all of your friends are sharing an inside joke or using a
new phrase, you’ll want to do it, too, so they know that you “get it.” Behaviors
are attractive when they help us fit in.

Each group offers an opportunity to leverage the 2nd Law of Behavior Change
and make our habits more attractive.

1. Imitating the Close

Proximity has a powerful effect on our behavior. This is true of the physical
environment, as we discussed in Chapter 6, but it is also true of the social
environment.

We pick up habits from the people around us. We copy the way our parents
handle arguments, the way our peers flirt with one another, the way our
coworkers get results. When your friends smoke pot, you give it a try, too. When
your wife has a habit of double-checking that the door is locked before going to
bed, you pick it up as well.

I find that I often imitate the behavior of those around me without realizing it.
In conversation, I’ll automatically assume the body posture of the other person.
In college, I began to talk like my roommates. When traveling to other countries,
I unconsciously imitate the local accent despite reminding myself to stop.

As a general rule, the closer we are to someone, the more likely we are to
imitate some of their habits. One groundbreaking study tracked twelve thousand
people for thirty-two years and found that “a person’s chances of becoming
obese increased by 57 percent if he or she had a friend who became obese.” It
works the other way, too. Another study found that if one person in a
relationship lost weight, the other partner would also slim down about one third

of the time. Our friends and family provide a sort of invisible peer pressure that

, he took a small
robotics class. Of the ten people in the class, four became astronauts. If your
goal was to make it into space, then that room was about the best culture you
could ask for. Similarly, one study found that the higher your best friend’s IQ at
age eleven or twelve, the higher your IQ would be at age fifteen, even after
controlling for natural levels of intelligence. We soak up the qualities and
practices of those around us.

One of the most effective things you can do to build better habits is to join a
culture where your desired behavior is the normal behavior. New habits seem

achievable when you see others doing them every day. Ifyou) aré!surrounded by

Surround yourself with people who have the habits you want to have yourself.
You'll rise together.

. Steve Kamb, an
entrepreneur in New York City, runs a company called Nerd Fitness, which
“helps nerds, misfits, and mutants lose weight, get strong, and get healthy.” His
clients include video game lovers, movie fanatics, and average Joes who want to
get in shape. Many people feel out of place the first time they go to the gym or
try to change their diet, but if you are already similar to the other members of the
group in some way—say, your mutual love of Star Wars—change becomes
more appealing because it feels like something people like you already do.

Nothing sustains motivation better than belonging to the tribe. It transforms a
personal quest into a shared one. Previously, you were on your own. Your
identity was singular. You are a reader. You are a musician. You are an athlete.
When you join a book club or a band or a cycling group, your identity becomes
linked to those around you. Growth and change is no longer an individual
pursuit. We are readers. We are musicians. We are cyclists. The shared identity
begins to reinforce your personal identity. This is why remaining part of a group
after achieving a goal is crucial to maintaining your habits. It’s friendship and
community that embed a new identity and help behaviors last over the long run.
2. Imitating the Many

In the 1950s, psychologist Solomon Asch conducted a series of experiments that
are now taught to legions of undergrads each year. To begin each experiment,
the subject entered the room with a group of strangers. Unbeknownst to them,
the other participants were actors planted by the researcher and instructed to
deliver scripted answers to certain questions.

The group would be shown one card with a line on it and then a second card
with a series of lines. Each person was asked to select the line on the second card
that was similar in length to the line on the first card. It was a very simple task.
Here is an example of two cards used in the experiment:

CONFORMING TO SOCIAL NORMS

FIGURE 10: This is a representation of two cards used by Solomon Asch in his famous social conformity experiments. The length of the line on the first card (left) is obviously the same as
line C, but when a group of actors claimed it was a different length the research subjects would often change their minds and go with the crowd rather than believe their own eyes.

The experiment always began the same. First, there would be some easy trials
where everyone agreed on the correct line. After a few rounds, the participants
were shown a test that was just as obvious as the previous ones, except the actors
in the room would select an intentionally incorrect answer. For example, they
would respond “A” to the comparison shown in Figure 10. Everyone would
agree that the lines were the same even though they were clearly different.

The subject, who was unaware of the ruse, would immediately become
bewildered. Their eyes would open wide. They would laugh nervously to
themselves. They would double-check the reactions of other participants. Their
agitation would grow as one person after another delivered the same incorrect
response. Soon, the subject began to doubt their own eyes. Eventually, they
delivered the answer they knew in their heart to be incorrect.

Asch ran this experiment many times and in many different ways. What he
discovered was that as the number of actors increased, so did the conformity of
the subject. If it was just the subject and one actor, then there was no effect on
the person’s choice. They just assumed they were in the room with a dummy.
When two actors were in the room with the subject, there was still little impact.
But as the number of people increased to three actors and four and all the way to
eight, the subject became more likely to second-guess themselves. By the end of
the experiment, nearly 75 percent of the subjects had agreed with the group
answer even though it was obviously incorrect.

Whenever we are unsure how to act, we look to the group to guide our
behavior. We are constantly scanning our environment and wondering, “What is
everyone else doing?” We check reviews on Amazon or Yelp or TripAdvisor
because we want to imitate the “best” buying, eating, and travel habits. It’s
usually a smart strategy. There is evidence in numbers.

But there can be a downside.

The normal behavior of the tribe often overpowers the desired behavior of the
individual. For example, one study found that when a chimpanzee learns an
effective way to crack nuts open as a member of one group and then switches to
a new group that uses a less effective strategy, it will avoid using the superior
nut cracking method just to blend in with the rest of the chimps.

reward of winning an argument, looking smart, or finding truth, Most days, we'd

rather be wrong with the crowd than be right by ourselves.
3. Imitating the Powerful

We are drawn to behaviors that earn us respect, approval, admiration, and
status. We want to be the one in the gym who can do muscle-ups or the musician
who can play the hardest chord progressions or the parent with the most
accomplished children because these things separate us from the crowd. Once
we fit in, we start looking for ways to stand out.

industry, You make a recipe from your favorite baker. You borrow the
storytelling strategies of your favorite writer. You mimic the communication

style of your boss. We imitate people we'envy.
. And that

means if a behavior can get us approval, respect, and praise, wé find it attractive!
We are also motivated to avoid behaviors that would lower our status. We

trim our hedges and mow our lawn because we don’t want to be the slob of the
neighborhood. When our mother comes to visit, we clean up the house because
we don’t want to be judged. We are continually wondering What will others
think of me?” and altering our behavior based on the answer.

The Polgar sisters—the chess prodigies mentioned at the beginning of this
chapter—are evidence of the powerful and lasting impact social influences can
have on our behavior. The sisters practiced chess for many hours each day and
continued this remarkable effort for decades.

culture. From the praise of their parents to the achievement of different status
markers like becoming a grandmaster, they had many reasons to continue their
effort.
Chapter Summary

10
How to Find and Fix the Causes of Your Bad
Habits

I. tare22, I was sitting in an old apartment just a few blocks from Istanbul’s most

famous street, Istiklal Caddesi. I was in the middle of a four-day trip to Turkey
and my guide, Mike, was relaxing in a worn-out armchair a few feet away.

Mike wasn’t really a guide. He was just a guy from Maine who had been
living in Turkey for five years, but he offered to show me around while I was
visiting the country and I took him up on it. On this particular night, I had been
invited to dinner with him and a handful of his Turkish friends.

There were seven of us, and I was the only one who hadn’t, at some point,

smoked at least one pack of cigarettes per day. I asked one of the Turks how he
got started. “Friends,” he said. “It always starts with your friends. One friend

What was truly fascinating was that half of the people in the room had
managed to quit smoking. Mike had been smoke-free for a few years at that
point, and he swore up and down that he broke the habit because of a book
called Allen Carr's Easy Way to Stop Smoking.

“It frees you from the mental burden of smoking,” he said. “It tells you: “Stop
lying to yourself. You know you don’t actually want to smoke. You know you
don’t really enjoy this.’ It helps you feel like you’re not the victim anymore. You
start to realize that you don’t need to smoke.”

I had never tried a cigarette, but I took a look at the book afterward out of
curiosity. The author employs an interesting strategy to help smokers eliminate
their cravings. He systematically reframes each cue associated with smoking and

gives it anew meaning.
He says things like:

Over and over, he repeats these phrases and others like them. “Get it clearly
into your mind,” he says. “You are losing nothing and you are making
marvelous positive gains not only in health, energy and money but also in
confidence, self-respect, freedom and, most important of all, in the length and
quality of your future life.”

By the time you get to the end of the book, smoking seems like the most
ridiculous thing in the world to do. And if you no longer expect smoking to bring
you any benefits, you have no reason to smoke. It is an inversion of the 2nd Law
of Behavior Change: make it unattractive.

Now, I know this idea might sound overly simplistic. Just change your mind and
you can quit smoking. But stick with me for a minute.

WHERE CRAVINGS COME FROM

I
often have a craving that goes something like this: “I want to eat tacos.” If you
were to ask me why I want to eat tacos, I wouldn’t say, “Because I need food to
survive.” But the truth is, somewhere deep down, I am motivated to eat tacos

because I have to eat to survive. The underlying motive is to obtain food and

A craving is just a specific manifestation of a deeper underlying motive. Your
brain did not evolve with a desire to smoke cigarettes or to check Instagram or to
play video games. At a deep level, you simply want to reduce uncertainty and
relieve anxiety, to win social acceptance and approval, or to achieve status.

Look at nearly any product that is habit-forming and you’ll see that it does not
create a new motivation, but rather latches onto the underlying motives of
human nature.

Your habits are modern-day solutions to ancient desires. New versions of old
vices. The underlying motives behind human behavior remain the same. The
specific habits we perform differ based on the period of history.

Here’s the powerful part: there are many different ways to address the same
underlying motive. One person might learn to reduce stress by smoking a
cigarette. Another person learns to ease their anxiety by going for a run. Your
current habits are not necessarily the best way to solve the problems you face;
they are just the methods you learned to use. Once you associate a solution with
the problem you need to solve, you keep coming back to it.

Habits are all about associations. These associations determine whether we
predict a habit to be worth repeating or not. As we covered in our discussion of
the 1st Law, your brain is continually absorbing information and noticing cues in
the environment. Every time you perceive a cue, your brain runs a simulation
and makes a prediction about what to do in the next moment.

You see a cue, categorize it based on past experience, and determine the
appropriate response.
This all happens in an instant, but it plays a crucial role in your habits because
every action is preceded by a prediction. Life feels reactive, but it is actually
predictive. All day long, you are making your best guess of how to act given
what you’ve just seen and what has worked for you in the past. You are
endlessly predicting what will happen in the next moment.

Our behavior is heavily dependent on these predictions. Put another way, our
behavior is heavily dependent on how we interpret the events that happen to us,
not necessarily the objective reality of the events themselves. Two people can
look at the same cigarette, and one feels the urge to smoke while the other is
repulsed by the smell. The same cue can spark a good habit or a bad habit

depending on your prediction, The cause of your habits is actually the prediction

These predictions lead to feelings, which is how we typically describe a
craving—a feeling, a desire, an urge. Feelings and emotions transform the cues
we perceive and the predictions we make into a signal that we can apply. They
help explain what we are currently sensing. For instance, whether or not you
realize it, you are noticing how warm or cold you feel right now. If the
temperature drops by one degree, you probably won’t do anything. If the
temperature drops ten degrees, however, you’ll feel cold and put on another
layer of clothing. Feeling cold was the signal that prompted you to act. You have
been sensing the cues the entire time, but it is only when you predict that you
would be better off in a different state that you take action.

A craving is the sense that something is missing. It is the desire to change
your internal state. When the temperature falls, there is a gap between what your
body is currently sensing and what it wants to be sensing. This gap between your
current state and your desired state provides a reason to act.

Desire is the difference between where you are now and where you want to be
in the future. Even the tiniest action is tinged with the motivation to feel
differently than you do in the moment. When you binge-eat or light up or browse
social media, what you really want is not a potato chip or a cigarette or a bunch
of likes. What you really want is to feel different.

Our feelings and emotions tell us whether to hold steady in our current state or
to make a change. They help us decide the best course of action. Neurologists
have discovered that when emotions and feelings are impaired, we actually lose
the ability to make decisions. We have no signal of what to pursue and what to
avoid. As the neuroscientist Antonio Damasio explains, “It is emotion that
allows you to mark things as good, bad, or indifferent.”

really an attempt to address your fundamental underlying motives. Whenever a

habit successfully addresses a motive, you develop a craving to do it again. In
time, you learn to predict that checking social media will help you feel loved or
that watching YouTube will allow you to forget your fears. Habits are attractive
when we associate them with positive feelings, and we can use this insight to our
advantage rather than to our detriment.

HOW TO REPROGRAM YOUR BRAIN TO ENJOY HARD HABITS

. Sometimes, a
You have
to wake up early for work. You have to make another sales call for your
business. You have to cook dinner for your family.

Now, imagine changing just one word: You don’t “have” to. You “get” to.

You get to wake up early for work. You get to make another sales call for
your business. You get to cook dinner for your family. By simply changing one
word, you shift the way you view each event. You transition from seeing these
behaviors as burdens and turn them into opportunities.

The key point is that both versions of reality are true. You have to do those
things, and you also get to do them. We can find evidence for whatever mind-set
we choose.

I once heard a story about a man who uses a wheelchair. When asked if it was
difficult being confined, he responded, “I’m not confined to my wheelchair—I
am liberated by it. If it wasn’t for my wheelchair, I would be bed-bound and
never able to leave my house.” This shift in perspective completely transformed
how he lived each day.

Reframing your habits to highlight their benefits rather than their drawbacks is
a fast and lightweight way to reprogram your mind and make a habit seem more
attractive.

Exercise.

Finance.

Meditatio

presentation or competing in an important event. They experience quicker
breathing, a faster heart rate, heightened arousal. If we interpret these feelings
negatively, then we feel threatened and tense up. If we interpret these feelings
positively, then we can respond with fluidity and grace. You can reframe “I am
nervous” to “I am excited and I’m getting an adrenaline rush to help me
concentrate.”

These little mind-set shifts aren’t magic, but they can help change the feelings
you associate with a particular habit or situation.

If you want to take it a step further, you can create a motivation ritual. You
simply practice associating your habits with something you enjoy, then you can
use that cue whenever you need a bit of motivation. For instance, if you always
play the same song before having sex, then you’ll begin to link the music with
the act. Whenever you want to get in the mood, just press play.

Ed Latimore, a boxer and writer from Pittsburgh, benefited from a similar
strategy without knowing it. “Odd realization,” he wrote. “My focus and
concentration goes up just by putting my headphones [on] while writing. I don’t
even have to play any music.” Without realizing it, he was conditioning himself.
In the beginning, he put his headphones on, played some music he enjoyed, and
did focused work. After doing it five, ten, twenty times, putting his headphones
on became a cue that he automatically associated with increased focus. The
craving followed naturally.

Athletes use similar strategies to get themselves in the mind-set to perform.
During my baseball career, I developed a specific ritual of stretching and
throwing before each game. The whole sequence took about ten minutes, and I
did it the same way every single time. While it physically warmed me up to play,
more importantly, it put me in the right mental state. I began to associate my
pregame ritual with feeling competitive and focused. Even if I wasn’t motivated
beforehand, by the time I was done with my ritual, I was in “game mode.”

Three deep breaths. Smile. Pet the dog. Repeat.
Eventually, you’ll begin to associate this breathe-and-smile routine with being
in a good mood. It becomes a cue that means feeling happy. Once established,
you can break it out anytime you need to change your emotional state. Stressed
at work? Take three deep breaths and smile. Sad about life? Three deep breaths
and smile. Once a habit has been built, the cue can prompt a craving, even if it
has little to do with the original situation.
Chapter Summary

HOW TO CREATE A GOOD HABIT

he 1st Law: Make It Obvious

1.1; Fill out the Habits Scorecard, Write down your current habits to become aware of them.
1.2: Use implementation intentions: “1 will [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCATION].”
1,3: Use habit stacking: “After [CURRENT HABIT], | will [NEW HABIT].”

1.4: Design your environment. Make the cues of good habits obvious and visible.

(The 2nd Law: Make It Attractive

2.1: Use temptation bundling, Pair an action you want to do with an action you need to do.
2.2: Join a culture where your desired behavior is the normal behavior.
2.3: Create a motivation ritual. Do something you enjoy immediately before a difficult habit.

(The 3rd Law: Make It Easy

he 4th Law: Make It Satisfying

HOW TO BREAK A BAD HABIT

Inversion of the 1st Law: Make It Invisible}

1.5: Reduce exposure. Remove the cues of your bad habits from your environment.

Inversion of the 2nd Law: Make It Unattractive

2.4: Reframe your mind-set. Highlight the benefits of avoiding your bad habits.
Inversion of the 3rd Law: Make It Difficul
Inversion of the 4th Law: Make It Unsatisfying

You can download a printable version of this habits cheat sheet at: atomichabits.com/cheatsheet

THE 3RD LAW

Make It Easy
11
Walk Slowly, but Never Backward

O. 1 nest day Of class, Jerry Uelsmann, a professor at the University of Florida,

divided his film photography students into two groups.

Everyone on the left side of the classroom, he explained, would be in the
“quantity” group. They would be graded solely on the amount of work they
produced. On the final day of class, he would tally the number of photos
submitted by each student. One hundred photos would rate an A, ninety photos a
B, eighty photos a C, and so on.

Meanwhile, everyone on the right side of the room would be in the “quality”
group. They would be graded only on the excellence of their work. They would
only need to produce one photo during the semester, but to get an A, it had to be
a nearly perfect image.

At the end of the term, he was surprised to find that all the best photos were
produced by the quantity group. During the semester, these students were busy
taking photos, experimenting with composition and lighting, testing out various
methods in the darkroom, and learning from their mistakes. In the process of
creating hundreds of photos, they honed their skills. Meanwhile, the quality
group sat around speculating about perfection. In the end, they had little to show
for their efforts other than unverified theories and one mediocre photo.*

It is easy to get bogged down trying to find the optimal plan for change: the
fastest way to lose weight, the best program to build muscle, the perfect idea for
a side hustle. We are so focused on figuring out the best approach that we never

get around to taking action. As Voltaire once wrote, “The best is the enemy of

I refer to this as the difference between being in motion and taking action. The
two ideas sound similar, but they’re not the same. When you’re in motion,
you’re planning and strategizing and learning. Those are all good things, but
they don’t produce a result.
Action, on the other hand, is the type of behavior that will deliver an outcome.
If I outline twenty ideas for articles I want to write, that’s motion. If I actually sit
down and write an article, that’s action. If I search for a better diet plan and read
a few books on the topic, that’s motion. If I actually eat a healthy meal, that’s
action.

Sometimes motion is useful, but it will never produce an outcome by itself. It
doesn’t matter how many times you go talk to the personal trainer, that motion
will never get you in shape. Only the action of working out will get the result
you’re looking to achieve.

If motion doesn’t lead to results, why do we do it? Sometimes we do it
because we actually need to plan or learn more. But more often than not, we do
it because motion allows us to feel like we’re making progress without running
the risk of failure. Most of us are experts at avoiding criticism. It doesn’t feel
good to fail or to be judged publicly, so we tend to avoid situations where that
might happen. And that’s the biggest reason why you slip into motion rather than
taking action: you want to delay failure.

It’s easy to be in motion and convince yourself that you’re still making
progress. You think, “I’ve got conversations going with four potential clients
right now. This is good. We’re moving in the right direction.” Or, “I
brainstormed some ideas for that book I want to write. This is coming together.”

Motion makes you feel like you’re getting things done. But really, you’re just
preparing to get something done. When preparation becomes a form of
procrastination, you need to change something. You don’t want to merely be
planning. You want to be practicing.

HOW LONG DOES IT ACTUALLY TAKE TO FORM A NEW HABIT?

Habit formation is the process by which a behavior becomes progressively more
automatic through repetition. The more you repeat an activity, the more the
structure of your brain changes to become efficient at that activity.
Neuroscientists call this long-term potentiation, which refers to the strengthening
of connections between neurons in the brain based on recent patterns of activity.
With each repetition, cell-to-cell signaling improves and the neural connections
tighten. First described by neuropsychologist Donald Hebb in 1949, this
phenomenon is commonly known as Hebb’s Law: “Neurons that fire together
wire together.”

Mathematicians,
meanwhile, have increased gray matter in the inferior parietal lobule, which
plays a key role in computation and calculation. Its size is directly correlated
with the amount of time spent in the field; the older and more experienced the
mathematician, the greater the increase in gray matter.

When scientists analyzed the brains of taxi drivers in London, they found that
the hippocampus—a region of the brain involved in spatial memory—was
significantly larger in their subjects than in non-taxi drivers. Even more
fascinating, the hippocampus decreased in size when a driver retired. Like the
muscles of the body responding to regular weight training, particular regions of
the brain adapt as they are used and atrophy as they are abandoned.

Of course, the importance of repetition in establishing habits was recognized
long before neuroscientists began poking around. In 1860, the English
philosopher George H. Lewes noted, “In learning to speak a new language, to
play on a musical instrument, or to perform unaccustomed movements, great
difficulty is felt, because the channels through which each sensation has to pass
have not become established; but no sooner has frequent repetition cut a
pathway, than this difficulty vanishes; the actions become so automatic that they
can be performed while the mind is otherwise engaged.” Both common sense
and scientific evidence agree: repetition is a form of change.

Each time you repeat an action, you are activating a particular neural circuit
associated with that habi

It is why the
students who took tons of photos improved their skills while those who merely
theorized about perfect photos did not. One group engaged in active practice, the
other in passive learning. One in action, the other in motion.

It looks something like this:

THE HABIT LINE
eee ee OHABIT
LINE

AUTOMATICITY

REPETITIONS

FIGURE 11: In the beginning (point A), a habit requires a good deal of effort and concentration to perform. After a few repetitions (point B), it gets easier, but still requires some conscious
attention, With enough practice (point C), the habit becomes more automatic than conscious. Beyond this threshold—the habit line—the behavior can be done more or less without thinking,
‘Anew habit has been formed.

On the following page, you’ll see what it looks like when researchers track the
level of automaticity for an actual habit like walking for ten minutes each day.
The shape of these charts, which scientists call learning curves, reveals an
important truth about behavior change: habits form based on frequency, not
time.

WALKING 10 MINUTES PER DAY
AUTOMATICITY

10 20 30 40 10 60

DAY

70 80 90 100

FIGURE 12: This graph shows someone who built the habit of walking for ten minutes after breakfast each day. Notice that as the repetitions increase, so does automaticity, until the
behavior is as easy and automatic as it can be.

One of the most common questions I hear is, “How long does it take to build a
new habit?” But what people really should be asking is, “How many does it take
to form a new habit?” That is, how many repetitions are required to make a habit
automatic?

Your current habits have been internalized over the course
of hundreds, if not thousands, of repetitions. New habits require the same level
of frequency. You need to string together enough successful attempts until the
behavior is firmly embedded in your mind and you cross the Habit Line.

In practice, it doesn’t really matter how long it takes for a habit to become
automatic. What matters is that you take the actions you need to take to make

Chapter Summary

12
The Law of Least Effort

I. uis awarp“winninc soox, Guns, Germs, and Steel, anthropologist and biologist Jared

Diamond points out a simple fact: different continents have different shapes. At
first glance, this statement seems rather obvious and unimportant, but it turns out
to have a profound impact on human behavior.

The primary axis of the Americas runs from north to south. That is, the
landmass of North and South America tends to be tall and thin rather than wide
and fat. The same is generally true for Africa. Meanwhile, the landmass that
makes up Europe, Asia, and the Middle East is the opposite. This massive stretch
of land tends to be more east-west in shape. According to Diamond, this
difference in shape played a significant role in the spread of agriculture over the
centuries.

When agriculture began to spread around the globe, farmers had an easier
time expanding along east-west routes than along north-south ones. This is
because locations along the same latitude generally share similar climates,
amounts of sunlight and rainfall, and changes in season. These factors allowed
farmers in Europe and Asia to domesticate a few crops and grow them along the
entire stretch of land from France to China.

THE SHAPE OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
EAST - WEST ORIENTATION

/

NORTH - SOUTH ORIENTATION

FIGURE 13: The primary axis of Europe and Asia is east-west. The primary axis of the Americas and Africa is north-south. This leads to a wider range of climates up-and-down the
Americas than across Europe and Asia, As a result, agriculture spread nearly twice as fast across Europe and Asia than it did elsewhere, The behavior of farmers—even across hundreds or
thousands of years—was constrained by the amount of friction in the environment.

By comparison, the climate varies greatly when traveling from north to south.
Just imagine how different the weather is in Florida compared to Canada. You
can be the most talented farmer in the world, but it won’t help you grow Florida
oranges in the Canadian winter. Snow is a poor substitute for soil. In order to
spread crops along north-south routes, farmers would need to find and
domesticate new plants whenever the climate changed.

As a result, agriculture spread two to three times faster across Asia and
Europe than it did up and down the Americas. Over the span of centuries, this
small difference had a very big impact. Increased food production allowed for
more rapid population growth. With more people, these cultures were able to
build stronger armies and were better equipped to develop new technologies.
The changes started out small—a crop that spread slightly farther, a population
that grew slightly faster—but compounded into substantial differences over time.

The spread of agriculture provides an example of the 3rd Law of Behavior
Change on a global scale. Conventional wisdom holds that motivation is the key
to habit change. Maybe if you really wanted it, you’d actually do it. But the truth
is, our real motivation is to be lazy and to do what is convenient. And despite
what the latest productivity best seller will tell you, this is a smart strategy, not a
dumb one.

Energy is precious, and the brain is wired to conserve it whenever possible. It
is human nature to follow the Law of Least Effort, which states that when
deciding between two similar options, people will naturally gravitate toward the
option that requires the least amount of work.* For example, expanding your
farm to the east where you can grow the same crops rather than heading north
where the climate is different. Out of all the possible actions we could take, the
one that is realized is the one that delivers the most value for the least effort. We
are motivated to do what is easy.

Every action requires a certain amount of energy. The more energy required,
the less likely it is to occur. If your goal is to do a hundred push-ups per day,
that’s a lot of energy! In the beginning, when you’re motivated and excited, you
can muster the strength to get started. But after a few days, such a massive effort
feels exhausting. Meanwhile, sticking to the habit of doing one push-up per day
requires almost no energy to get started. And the less energy a habit requires, the
more likely it is to occur.

Look at any behavior that fills up much of your life and you’ll see that it can
be performed with very low levels of motivation. Habits like scrolling on our
phones, checking email, and watching television steal so much of our time
because they can be performed almost without effort. They are remarkably
convenient.

In a sense, every habit is just an obstacle to getting what you really want.
Dieting is an obstacle to getting fit. Meditation is an obstacle to feeling calm.

itself. What you really want is the outcome the habit delivers. The greater the
the more friction there is between
you and your desired end state. This is why it is crucial to make your habits so
easy that you’ll do them even when you don’t feel like it. If you can make your
good habits more convenient, you’!l be more likely to follow through on them.

But what about all the moments when we seem to do the opposite? If we’re all
so lazy, then how do you explain people accomplishing hard things like raising a
child or starting a business or climbing Mount Everest?

Certainly, you are capable of doing very hard things. The problem is that
some days you feel like doing the hard work and some days you feel like giving
in. On the tough days, it’s crucial to have as many things working in your favor
as possible so that you can overcome the challenges life naturally throws your
way. The less friction you face, the easier it is for your stronger self to emerge.
The idea behind make it easy is not to only do easy things. The idea is to make it
as easy as possible in the moment to do things that payoff in the long run.

HOW TO ACHIEVE MORE WITH LESS EFFORT

Imagine you are holding a garden hose that is bent in the middle. Some water
can flow through, but not very much. If you want to increase the rate at which
water passes through the hose, you have two options. The first option is to crank
up the valve and force more water out. The second option is to simply remove
the bend in the hose and let water flow through naturally.

Trying to pump up your motivation to stick with a hard habit is like trying to
force water through a bent hose. You can do it, but it requires a lot of effort and
increases the tension in your life. Meanwhile, making your habits simple and
easy is like removing the bend in the hose. Rather than trying to overcome the
friction in your life, you reduce it.

n Chapter 6, we discussed environment
design as a method for making cues more obvious, but you can also optimize
your environment to make actions easier. For example, when deciding where to
practice a new habit, it is best to choose a place that is already along the path of
your daily routine. Habits are easier to build when they fit into the flow of your
life. You are more likely to go to the gym if it is on your way to work because
stopping doesn’t add much friction to your lifestyle. By comparison, if the gym
is off the path of your normal commute—even by just a few blocks—now you’re
going “out of your way” to get there.

Perhaps even more effective is reducing the friction within your home or
office.

. This is precisely what electronics manufacturers in
Japan began to do in the 1970s.

In an article published in the New Yorker titled “Better All the Time,” James
Suroweicki writes:

“Japanese firms emphasized what came to be known as ‘lean production,’
relentlessly looking to remove waste of all kinds from the production process,
down to redesigning workspaces, so workers didn’t have to waste time twisting
and turning to reach their tools. The result was that Japanese factories were more
efficient and Japanese products were more reliable than American ones. In 1974,
service calls for American-made color televisions were five times as common as
for Japanese televisions. By 1979, it took American workers three times as long
to assemble their sets.”
. As they subtracted wasted effort, they added customers and
revenue. Similarly, when we remove the points of friction that sap our time and
energy, we can achieve more with less effort. (This is one reason tidying up can
feel so good: we are simultaneously moving forward and lightening the
cognitive load our environment places on us.)

If you look at the most habit-forming products, you’ll notice that one of the
things these goods and services do best is remove little bits of friction from your
life. Meal delivery services reduce the friction of shopping for groceries. Dating

Like a Japanese television manufacturer redesigning

They reduce the number of
fields on each form. They pare down the number of clicks required to create an
account. They deliver their products with easy-to-understand directions or ask
their customers to make fewer choices.

When the first voice-activated speakers were released—products like Google
Home, Amazon Echo, and Apple HomePod—I asked a friend what he liked
about the product he had purchased. He said it was just easier to say “Play some
country music” than to pull out his phone, open the music app, and pick a
playlist. Of course, just a few years earlier, having unlimited access to music in
your pocket was a remarkably frictionless behavior compared to driving to the
store and buying a CD. Business is a never-ending quest to deliver the same
result in an easier fashion.

Similar strategies have been used effectively by governments. When the
British government wanted to increase tax collection rates, they switched from
sending citizens to a web page where the tax form could be downloaded to
linking directly to the form. Reducing that one step in the process increased the
response rate from 19.2 percent to 23.4 percent. For a country like the United
Kingdom, those percentage points represent millions in tax revenue.

The central idea is to create an environment where doing the right thing is as
easy as possible. Much of the battle of building better habits comes down to
finding ways to reduce the friction associated with our good habits and increase
the friction associated with our bad ones.
PRIME THE ENVIRONMENT FOR FUTURE USE

Oswald Nuckols is an IT developer from Natchez, Mississippi. He is also
someone who understands the power of priming his environment.

Nuckols dialed in his cleaning habits by following a strategy he refers to as
“resetting the room.” For instance, when he finishes watching television, he
places the remote back on the TV stand, arranges the pillows on the couch, and
folds the blanket. When he leaves his car, he throws any trash away. Whenever
he takes a shower, he wipes down the toilet while the shower is warming up. (As
he notes, the “perfect time to clean the toilet is right before you wash yourself in
the shower anyway.”) The purpose of resetting each room is not simply to clean
up after the last action, but to prepare for the next action.

“When I walk into a room everything is in its right place,” Nuckols wrote.
“Because I do this every day in every room, stuff always stays in good shape. . . .
People think I work hard but I’m actually really lazy. I’m just proactively lazy. It
gives you so much time back.”

Whenever you organize a space for its intended purpose, you are priming it to
make the next action easy. For instance, my wife keeps a box of greeting cards
that are presorted by occasion—birthday, sympathy, wedding, graduation, and
more. Whenever necessary, she grabs an appropriate card and sends it off. She is
incredibly good at remembering to send cards because she has reduced the
friction of doing so. For years, I was the opposite. Someone would have a baby
and I would think, “I should send a card.” But then weeks would pass and by the
time I remembered to pick one up at the store, it was too late. The habit wasn’t
easy.

There are many ways to prime your environment so it’s ready for immediate
use. If you want to cook a healthy breakfast, place the skillet on the stove, set the
cooking spray on the counter, and lay out any plates and utensils you’ll need the
night before. When you wake up, making breakfast will be easy.

These are simple ways to make the good habit the path of least resistance.

You can also invert this principle and prime the environment to make bad
behaviors difficult. If you find yourself watching too much television, for
example, then unplug it after each use. Only plug it back in if you can say out
loud the name of the show you want to watch. This setup creates just enough
friction to prevent mindless viewing.

. You can be sure you’ll only take it
out when you really want to watch something. The greater the friction, the less
likely the habit.

Whenever possible, I leave my phone in a different room until lunch. When
it’s right next to me, I’ll check it all morning for no reason at all. But when it is
in another room, I rarely think about it. And the friction is high enough that I
won’t go get it without a reason. As a result, I get three to four hours each
morning when I can work without interruption.

If sticking your phone in another room doesn’t seem like enough, tell a friend
or family member to hide it from you for a few hours. Ask a coworker to keep it
at their desk in the morning and give it back to you at lunch.

It is remarkable how little friction is required to prevent unwanted behavior.
When I hide beer in the back of the fridge where I can’t see it, I drink less. When
I delete social media apps from my phone, it can be weeks before I download
them again and log in. These tricks are unlikely to curb a true addiction, but for
many of us, a little bit of friction can be the difference between sticking with a
good habit or sliding into a bad one. Imagine the cumulative impact of making
dozens of these changes and living in an environment designed to make the good
behaviors easier and the bad behaviors harder.

Whether we are approaching behavior change as an individual, a parent, a
coach, or a leader, we should ask ourselves the same question: “How can we
design a world where it’s easy to do what’s right?” Redesign your life so the
actions that matter most are also the actions that are easiest to do.
Chapter Summary

13

How to Stop Procrastinating by Using the Two-
Minute Rule

Tas Tuane is Widely regarded as one of the greatest dancers and choreographers

of the modern era. In 1992, she was awarded a MacArthur Fellowship, often
referred to as the Genius Grant, and she has spent the bulk of her career touring
the globe to perform her original works. She also credits much of her success to
simple daily habits.

“T begin each day of my life with a ritual,” she writes. “I wake up at 5:30
A.M., put on my workout clothes, my leg warmers, my sweat shirt, and my hat. I
walk outside my Manhattan home, hail a taxi, and tell the driver to take me to
the Pumping Iron gym at 91st Street and First Avenue, where I work out for two
hours.

“The ritual is not the stretching and weight training I put my body through
each moming at the gym; the ritual is the cab. The moment I tell the driver
where to go I have completed the ritual.

“Tt’s a simple act, but doing it the same way each morning habitualizes it—
makes it repeatable, easy to do. It reduces the chance that I would skip it or do it
differently. It is one more item in my arsenal of routines, and one less thing to
think about.”

Hailing a cab each moming may be a tiny action, but it is a splendid example
of the 3rd Law of Behavior Change.

Researchers estimate that 40 to 50 percent of our actions on any given day are
done out of habit. This is already a substantial percentage, but the true influence
of your habits is even greater than these numbers suggest. Habits are automatic
choices that influence the conscious decisions that follow. Yes, a habit can be
completed in just a few seconds, but it can also shape the actions that you take
for minutes or hours afterward.

Habits are like the entrance ramp to a highway. They lead you down a path
and, before you know it, you’re speeding toward the next behavior. It seems to
be easier to continue what you are already doing than to start doing something
different. You sit through a bad movie for two hours. You keep snacking even
when you’re already full. You check your phone for “just a second” and soon
you have spent twenty minutes staring at the screen. In this way, the habits you
follow without thinking often determine the choices you make when you are
thinking.

Each evening, there is a tiny moment—usually around 5:15 p.m.—that shapes
the rest of my night. My wife walks in the door from work and either we change
into our workout clothes and head to the gym or we crash onto the couch, order
Indian food, and watch The Office.* Similar to Twyla Tharp hailing the cab, the
ritual is changing into my workout clothes. If I change clothes, I know the
workout will happen. Everything that follows—driving to the gym, deciding
which exercises to do, stepping under the bar—is easy once I’ve taken the first
step.

Every day, there are a handful of moments that deliver an outsized impact. I

refer to these little choices as decisive moments. The moment you decide

DECISIVE MOMENTS
GOOD

DAY
BAD
CHOICE ae
ETC
N CHOICE——
GOOD
CHOICE
GOOD
CHOICE
BAD
DAY

FIGURE 14: The difference between a good day and a bad day is often a few productive and healthy choices made at decisive moments. Each one is like a fork in the road, and these choices
stack up throughout the day and can ultimately lead to very different outcomes.

Decisive moments set the options available to your future self. For instance,
walking into a restaurant is a decisive moment because it determines what you’Il
be eating for lunch. Technically, you are in control of what you order, but in a
larger sense, you can only order an item if it is on the menu. If you walk into a
steakhouse, you can get a sirloin or a rib eye, but not sushi. Your options are
constrained by what’s available. They are shaped by the first choice.

We are limited by where our habits lead us. This is why mastering the
decisive moments throughout your day is so important. Each day is made up of
many moments, but it is really a few habitual choices that determine the path
you take. These little choices stack up, each one setting the trajectory for how
you spend the next chunk of time.
THE TWO-MINUTE RULE

. When you
dream about making a change, excitement inevitably takes over and you end up
trying to do too much too soon.

You’ll find that nearly any habit can be scaled down into a two-minute
version:

two minutes should be easy. What you want is a “gateway habit” that naturally

leads you down a more productive path.

You can usually figure out the gateway habits that will lead to your desired
outcome by mapping out your goals on a scale from “very easy” to “very hard.”
For instance, running a marathon is very hard. Running a 5K is hard. Walking
ten thousand steps is moderately difficult. Walking ten minutes is easy. And
putting on your running shoes is very easy. Your goal might be to run a
marathon, but your gateway habit is to put on your running shoes. That’s how
you follow the Two-Minute Rule.

Very hard

Put on your running shoes Walk ten minutes ‘Walk ten thousand steps Runa SK Run a marathon
Write one sentence Write one paragraph Write one thousand words Write a five-thousand-word article Write a book

Open your notes Study for ten minutes Study for three hours Get straight A’s Earn a PhD
If you can’t learn the basic skill of
showing up, then you have little hope of mastering the finer details.

As you master the art of showing up, the first two minutes simply become a
ritual at the beginning of a larger routine. This is not merely a hack to make
habits easier but actually the ideal way to master a difficult skill. The more you
ritualize the beginning of a process, the more likely it becomes that you can slip
into the state of deep focus that is required to do great things. By doing the same
warm-up before every workout, you make it easier to get into a state of peak
performance. By following the same creative ritual, you make it easier to get
into the hard work of creating. By developing a consistent power-down habit,
you make it easier to get to bed at a reasonable time each night. You may not be
able to automate the whole process, but you can make the first action mindless.
Make it easy to start and the rest will follow.

And if you know it’s a mental trick, why would you

fall for it?

. Your habit can only last one
hundred and twenty seconds.
One of my readers used this strategy to lose over one hundred pounds. In the
beginning, he went to the gym each day, but he told himself he wasn’t allowed
to stay for more than five minutes. He would go to the gym, exercise for five
minutes, and leave as soon as his time was up. After a few weeks, he looked
around and thought, “Well, I’m always coming here anyway. I might as well
start staying a little longer.” A few years later, the weight was gone.

Journaling provides another example. Nearly everyone can benefit from
getting their thoughts out of their head and onto paper, but most people give up
after a few days or avoid it entirely because journaling feels like a chore.* The
secret is to always stay below the point where it feels like work. Greg
McKeown, a leadership consultant from the United Kingdom, built a daily
journaling habit by specifically writing less than he felt like. He always stopped
journaling before it seemed like a hassle. Ernest Hemingway believed in similar
advice for any kind of writing. “The best way is to always stop when you are
going good,” he said.

Strategies like this work for another reason, too: they reinforce the identity
you want to build. If you show up at the gym five days in a row—even if it’s just
for two minutes—you are casting votes for your new identity. You’re not
worried about getting in shape. You’re focused on becoming the type of person
who doesn’t miss workouts.

At some point, once you’ve established the habit and you’re showing up each
day, you can combine the Two-Minute Rule with a technique we call habit
shaping to scale your habit back up toward your ultimate goal. Start by
mastering the first two minutes of the smallest version of the behavior. Then,
advance to an intermediate step and repeat the process—focusing on just the first
two minutes and mastering that stage before moving on to the next level.
Eventually, you’ll end up with the habit you had originally hoped to build while
still keeping your focus where it should be: on the first two minutes of the
behavior.

EXAMPLES OF HABIT SHAPING

Becoming an Early Riser

Becoming Vegan|
Starting to Exercise|

Nearly any larger life goal can be transformed into a two-minute behavior. I
want to live a healthy and long life > I need to stay in shape > I need to exercise
> I need to change into my workout clothes. I want to have a happy marriage > I
need to be a good partner > I should do something each day to make my
partner’s life easier > I should meal plan for next week.

Whenever you are struggling to stick with a habit, you can employ the Two-
Minute Rule. It’s a simple way to make your habits easy.
Chapter Summary
14

How to Make Good Habits Inevitable and Bad
Habits Impossible

I, me summer or 1830, Wictor Hugo was facing an impossible deadline. Twelve months

earlier, the French author had promised his publisher a new book. But instead of
writing, he spent that year pursuing other projects, entertaining guests, and
delaying his work. Frustrated, Hugo’s publisher responded by setting a deadline
less than six months away. The book had to be finished by February 1831.

Hugo concocted a strange plan to beat his procrastination. He collected all of
his clothes and asked an assistant to lock them away in a large chest. He was left
with nothing to wear except a large shawl. Lacking any suitable clothing to go
outdoors, he remained in his study and wrote furiously during the fall and winter
of 1830. The Hunchback of Notre Dame was published two weeks early on
January 14, 1831.*

make it difficult. If you find yourself continually struggling to follow through on
your plans, then you can take a page from Victor Hugo and make your bad
habits more difficult by creating what psychologists call a commitment device.

. When Victor Hugo shut his clothes away

so he could focus on writing, he was creating a commitment device.*

There are many ways to create a commitment device. You can reduce

overeating by purchasing food in individual packages rather than in bulk size.

You can voluntarily ask to be added to the banned list at casinos and online
poker sites to prevent future gambling sprees. I’ve even heard of athletes who
As another example, my friend and fellow habits expert Nir Eyal purchased an
outlet timer, which is an adapter that he plugged in between his internet router
and the power outlet. At 10 p.m. each night, the outlet timer cuts off the power to
the router. When the internet goes off, everyone knows it is time to go to bed.

Commitment devices are useful because they enable you to take advantage of
good intentions before you can fall victim to temptation. Whenever I’m looking
to cut calories, for example, I will ask the waiter to split my meal and box half of
it to go before the meal is served. If I waited until the meal came out and told
myself “I’ll just eat half,” it would never work.

The key is to change the task such that it requires more work to get out of the
good habit than to get started on it. If you’re feeling motivated to get in shape,
schedule a yoga session and pay ahead of time. If you’re excited about the
business you want to start, email an entrepreneur you respect and set up a
consulting call. When the time comes to act, the only way to bail is to cancel the
meeting, which requires effort and may cost money.

Commitment devices increase the odds that you’ll do the right thing in the
However, we can do even
better. We can make good habits inevitable and bad habits impossible.

HOW TO AUTOMATE A HABIT AND NEVER THINK ABOUT IT
AGAIN

John Henry Patterson was born in Dayton, Ohio, in 1844. He spent his childhood
doing chores on the family farm and working shifts at his father’s sawmill. After
attending college at Dartmouth, Patterson returned to Ohio and opened a small
supply store for coal miners.

It seemed like a good opportunity. The store faced little competition and
enjoyed a steady stream of customers, but still struggled to make money. That
was when Patterson discovered his employees were stealing from him.

In the mid-1800s, employee theft was a common problem. Receipts were kept
in an open drawer and could easily be altered or discarded. There were no video
cameras to review behavior and no software to track transactions. Unless you
were willing to hover over your employees every minute of the day, or to
manage all transactions yourself, it was difficult to prevent theft.

As Patterson mulled over his predicament, he came across an advertisement
for a new invention called Ritty’s Incorruptible Cashier. Designed by fellow
Dayton resident James Ritty, it was the first cash register. The machine
automatically locked the cash and receipts inside after each transaction.
Patterson bought two for fifty dollars each.

Employee theft at his store vanished overnight. In the next six months,
Patterson’s business went from losing money to making $5,000 in profit—the
equivalent of more than $100,000 today.

Patterson was so impressed with the machine that he changed businesses. He
bought the rights to Ritty’s invention and opened the National Cash Register
Company. Ten years later, National Cash Register had over one thousand
employees and was on its way to becoming one of the most successful
businesses of its time.

The best way to break a bad habit is to make it impractical to do. Increase the
friction until you don’t even have the option to act. The brilliance of the cash
register was that it automated ethical behavior by making stealing practically
impossible. Rather than trying to change the employees, it made the preferred
behavior automatic.

Some actions—like installing a cash register—pay off again and again. These
onetime choices require a little bit of effort up front but create increasing value
over time. I’m fascinated by the idea that a single choice can deliver returns
again and again, and I surveyed my readers on their favorite onetime actions that
lead to better long-term habits. The table on the following page shares some of
the most popular answers.

I’d wager that if the average person were to simply do half of the onetime
actions on this list—even if they didn’t give another thought to their habits—
most would find themselves living a better life a year from now. These onetime
actions are a straightforward way to employ the 3rd Law of Behavior Change.
They make it easier to sleep well, eat healthy, be productive, save money, and
generally live better.

ONETIME ACTIONS THAT LOCK IN GOOD HABITS

Nutritio

Buy a water filter to clean your drinking water.
Use smaller plates to reduce caloric intake.

Sleep

Buy a good mattress.
Get blackout curtains.

Remove your television from your bedroom,

Unsubscribe from emails.
Turn off notifications and mute group chats.
Set your phone to silent.

Use email filters to clear up your inbox.
Delete games and social media apps on your phone.

Get a dog

Move to a friendly, social neighborhood.

General Heal

Get vaccinated,
Buy good shoes to avoid back pain.

Buy a supportive chair or standing desk.

Enroll in an automatic savings plan.
Set up automatic bill pay.
Cut cable service.

‘Ask service providers to lower your bills.

Of course, there are many ways to automate good habits and eliminate bad
ones. Typically, they involve putting technology to work for you. Technology
can transform actions that were once hard, annoying, and complicated into
behaviors that are easy, painless, and simple. It is the most reliable and effective
way to guarantee the right behavior.

This is particularly useful for behaviors that happen too infrequently to
become habitual. Things you have to do monthly or yearly—like rebalancing
your investment portfolio—are never repeated frequently enough to become a
habit, so they benefit in particular from technology “remembering” to do them
for you.

Other examples include:

° Medicine: Prescriptions can be automatically refilled.
Personal finance: Employees can save for retirement with an automatic
wage deduction.
Cooking: Meal-delivery services can do your grocery shopping.
Productivity: Social media browsing can be cut off with a website
blocker.

When you automate as much of your life as possible, you can spend your
effort on the tasks machines cannot do yet. Each habit that we hand over to the
authority of technology frees up time and energy to pour into the next stage of
growth. As mathematician and philosopher Alfred North Whitehead wrote,
“Civilization advances by extending the number of operations we can perform
without thinking about them.”
Of course, the power of technology can work against us as well. Binge-
watching becomes a habit because you have to put more effort in to stop looking
at the screen than to continue doing so. Instead of pressing a button to advance to
the next episode, Netflix or YouTube will autoplay it for you. All you have to do
is keep your eyes open.

Technology creates a level of convenience that enables you to act on your
smallest whims and desires. At the mere suggestion of hunger, you can have
food delivered to your door. At the slightest hint of boredom, you can get lost in
the vast expanse of social media. When the effort required to act on your desires
becomes effectively zero, you can find yourself slipping into whatever impulse
arises at the moment. The downside of automation is that we can find ourselves
jumping from easy task to easy task without making time for more difficult, but
ultimately more rewarding, work.

I often find myself gravitating toward social media during any downtime. If I
feel bored for just a fraction of a second, I reach for my phone. It’s easy to write
off these minor distractions as “just taking a break,” but over time they can
accumulate into a serious issue. The constant tug of “just one more minute” can
prevent me from doing anything of consequence. (I’m not the only one. The
average person spends over two hours per day on social media. What could you
do with an extra six hundred hours per year?)

During the year I was writing this book, I experimented with a new time
Management strategy. Every Monday, my assistant would reset the passwords on
all my social media accounts, which logged me out on each device. All week I
worked without distraction. On Friday, she would send me the new passwords. I
had the entire weekend to enjoy what social media had to offer until Monday
morning when she would do it again. (If you don’t have an assistant, team up
with a friend or family member and reset each other’s passwords each week.)

One of the biggest surprises was how quickly I adapted. Within the first week
of locking myself out of social media, I realized that I didn’t need to check it
nearly as often as I had been, and I certainly didn’t need it each day. It had
simply been so easy that it had become the default. Once my bad habit became
impossible, I discovered that I did actually have the motivation to work on more
meaningful tasks. After I removed the mental candy from my environment, it
became much easier to eat the healthy stuff.

When working in your favor, automation can make your good habits
inevitable and your bad habits impossible. It is the ultimate way to lock in future
behavior rather than relying on willpower in the moment. By utilizing
commitment devices, strategic onetime decisions, and technology, you can
create an environment of inevitability—a space where good habits are not just an
outcome you hope for but an outcome that is virtually guaranteed.
Chapter Summary

HOW TO CREATE A GOOD HABIT

he 1st Law: Make It Obvious|

1.4; Fill out the Habits Scorecard. Write down your current habits to become aware of them.
1.2: Use implementation intentior will [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCATION].”

1.3: Use habit stacking: “After [CURRENT HABIT], | will [NEW HABIT].”

1.4: Design your environment, Make the cues of good habits obvious and visible.

The 2nd Law: Make It Attractive

2.1: Use temptation bundling, Pair an action you want to do with an action you need to do.
2.2: Join a culture where your desired behavior is the normal behavior.
cult habit.

2.3: Create a motivation ritual. Do something you enjoy immediately before a dit

(The 3rd Law: Make It Easy

3.1: Reduce friction, Decrease the number of steps between you and your good habits.

3.2: Prime the environment. Prepare your environment to make future actions easier.

3.3: Master the decisive moment. Optimize the small choices that deliver outsized impact.

3.4: Use the Two-Minute Rule, Downscale your habits until they can be done in two minutes or less.
3.5: Automate your habits, Invest in technology and onetime purchases that lock in future behavior.

he 4th Law: Make It Satisfying

HOW TO BREAK A BAD HABIT

Inversion of the 1st Law: Make It Invisible}

1.5: Reduce exposure, Remove the cues of your bad habits from your environment.

Inversion of the 2nd Law: Make It Unattractive

2.4: Reframe your mind-set. Highlight the benefits of avoiding your bad habits.
mversion of the 3rd Law: Make It Difficul

3.6: Increase friction. Increase the number of steps between you and your bad habits.
3.7: Use a commitment device. Restrict your future choices to the ones that benefit you.

Inversion of the 4th Law: Make It Unsatisfying|

You can download a printable version of this habits cheat sheet at: atomichabits.com/cheatsheet

THE 4TH LAW

Make It Satisfying
15
The Cardinal Rule of Behavior Change

I. me tare 1990s, A PUblic health worker named Stephen Luby left his hometown of

Omaha, Nebraska, and bought a one-way ticket to Karachi, Pakistan.

Karachi was one of the most populous cities in the world. By 1998, over nine
million people called it home. It was the economic center of Pakistan and a
transportation hub, with some of the most active airports and seaports in the
region. In the commercial parts of town, you could find all of the standard urban
amenities and bustling downtown streets. But Karachi was also one of the least
livable cities in the world.

Over 60 percent of Karachi’s residents lived in squatter settlements and slums.
These densely packed neighborhoods were filled with makeshift houses cobbled
together from old boards, cinder blocks, and other discarded materials. There
was no waste removal system, no electricity grid, no clean water supply. When
dry, the streets were a combination of dust and trash. When wet, they became a
muddy pit of sewage. Mosquito colonies thrived in pools of stagnant water, and
children played among the garbage.

The unsanitary conditions lead to widespread illness and _ disease.
Contaminated water sources caused epidemics of diarrhea, vomiting, and
abdominal pain. Nearly one third of the children living there were malnourished.
With so many people crammed into such a small space, viruses and bacterial
infections spread rapidly. It was this public health crisis that had brought
Stephen Luby to Pakistan.

Luby and his team realized that in an environment with poor sanitation, the
simple habit of washing your hands could make a real difference in the health of
the residents. But they soon discovered that many people were already aware
that handwashing was important.

And yet, despite this knowledge, many residents were washing their hands in
a haphazard fashion. Some people would just run their hands under the water
quickly. Others would only wash one hand. Many would simply forget to wash
their hands before preparing food. Everyone said handwashing was important,
but few people made a habit out of it. The problem wasn’t knowledge. The
problem was consistency.

That was when Luby and his team partnered with Procter & Gamble to supply
the neighborhood with Safeguard soap. Compared to your standard bar of soap,
using Safeguard was a more enjoyable experience.

“In Pakistan, Safeguard was a premium soap,” Luby told me. “The study
participants commonly mentioned how much they liked it.” The soap foamed
easily, and people were able to lather their hands with suds. It smelled great.
Instantly, handwashing became slightly more pleasurable.

“T see the goal of handwashing promotion not as behavior change but as habit
adoption,” Luby said. “It is a lot easier for people to adopt a product that
provides a strong positive sensory signal, for example the mint taste of
toothpaste, than it is to adopt a habit that does not provide pleasurable sensory
feedback, like flossing one’s teeth. The marketing team at Procter & Gamble
talked about trying to create a positive handwashing experience.”

Within months, the researchers saw a rapid shift in the health of children in
the neighborhood. The rate of diarrhea fell by 52 percent; pneumonia by 48
percent; and impetigo, a bacterial skin infection, by 35 percent.

The long-term effects were even better. “We went back to some of the
households in Karachi six years after,” Luby told me. “Over 95 percent of
households who had been given the soap for free and encouraged to wash their
hands had a handwashing station with soap and water available when our study
team visited. ... We had not given any soap to the intervention group for over
five years, but during the trial they had become so habituated to wash their
hands, that they had maintained the practice.” It was a powerful example of the
fourth and final Law of Behavior Change: make it satisfying.

We are more likely to repeat a behavior when the experience is satisfying.
This is entirely logical. Feelings of pleasure—even minor ones like washing
your hands with soap that smells nice and lathers well—are signals that tell the
brain: “This feels good. Do this again, next time.” Pleasure teaches your brain
that a behavior is worth remembering and repeating.

Take the story of chewing gum. Chewing gum had been sold commercially
throughout the 1800s, but it wasn’t until Wrigley launched in 1891 that it
became a worldwide habit. Early versions were made from relatively bland
resins—chewy, but not tasty. Wrigley revolutionized the industry by adding
flavors like Spearmint and Juicy Fruit, which made the product flavorful and fun
to use. Then they went a step further and began pushing chewing gum as a
pathway to a clean mouth. Advertisements told readers to “Refresh Your Taste.”

Tasty flavors and the feeling of a fresh mouth provided little bits of immediate
reinforcement and made the product satisfying to use. Consumption skyrocketed,
and Wrigley became the largest chewing gum company in the world.

Toothpaste had a similar trajectory. Manufacturers enjoyed great success
when they added flavors like spearmint, peppermint, and cinnamon to their
products. These flavors don’t improve the effectiveness of toothpaste. They
simply create a “clean mouth” feel and make the experience of brushing your
teeth more pleasurable. My wife actually stopped using Sensodyne because she
didn’t like the aftertaste. She switched to a brand with a stronger mint flavor,
which proved to be more satisfying.

Conversely, if an experience is not satisfying, we have little reason to repeat
it. In my research, I came across the story of a woman who had a narcissistic
relative who drove her nuts. In an attempt to spend less time with this
egomaniac, she acted as dull and as boring as possible whenever he was around.
Within a few encounters, he started avoiding her because he found her so
uninteresting.

Stories like these are evidence of the Cardinal Rule of Behavior Change: What
is rewarded is repeated. What is punished is avoided. You learn what to do in
the future based on what you were rewarded for doing (or punished for doing) in
the past. Positive emotions cultivate habits. Negative emotions destroy them.

The first three laws of behavior change—make it obvious, make it attractive,
and make it easy—increase the odds that a behavior will be performed this time.
The fourth law of behavior change—make it satisfying—increases the odds that
a behavior will be repeated next time. It completes the habit loop.

But there is a trick. We are not looking for just any type of satisfaction. We
are looking for immediate satisfaction.

THE MISMATCH BETWEEN IMMEDIATE AND DELAYED
REWARDS

Imagine you’re an animal roaming the plains of Africa—a giraffe or an elephant
or a lion. On any given day, most of your decisions have an immediate impact.
You are always thinking about what to eat or where to sleep or how to avoid a
predator. You are constantly focused on the present or the very near future. You
live in what scientists call an immediate-return environment because your
actions instantly deliver clear and immediate outcomes.

Now switch back to your human self. In modern society, many of the choices
you make today will not benefit you immediately. If you do a good job at work,
you’ll get a paycheck in a few weeks. If you exercise today, perhaps you won’t
be overweight next year. If you save money now, maybe you’ll have enough for
retirement decades from now. You live in what scientists call a delayed-return
environment because you can work for years before your actions deliver the
intended payoff.

The human brain did not evolve for life in a delayed-return environment. The
earliest remains of modern humans, known as Homo sapiens sapiens, are
approximately two hundred thousand years old. These were the first humans to
have a brain relatively similar to ours. In particular, the neocortex—the newest
part of the brain and the region responsible for higher functions like language—
was roughly the same size two hundred thousand years ago as today. You are
walking around with the same hardware as your Paleolithic ancestors.

It is only recently—during the last five hundred years or so—that society has
shifted to a predominantly delayed-return environment.* Compared to the age of
the brain, modern society is brand-new. In the last one hundred years, we have
seen the rise of the car, the airplane, the television, the personal computer, the
internet, the smartphone, and Beyoncé. The world has changed much in recent
years, but human nature has changed little.

Similar to other animals on the African savannah, our ancestors spent their
days responding to grave threats, securing the next meal, and taking shelter from
a storm. It made sense to place a high value on instant gratification. The distant
future was less of a concern. And after thousands of generations in an
immediate-return environment, our brains evolved to prefer quick payoffs to
long-term ones.

Behavioral economists refer to this tendency as time inconsistency. That is,
the way your brain evaluates rewards is inconsistent across time.* You value the
present more than the future. Usually, this tendency serves us well. A reward
that is certain right now is typically worth more than one that is merely possible
in the future. But occasionally, our bias toward instant gratification causes
problems.

Why would someone smoke if they know it increases the risk of lung cancer?
Why would someone overeat when they know it increases their risk of obesity?
Why would someone have unsafe sex if they know it can result in sexually
transmitted disease? Once you understand how the brain prioritizes rewards, the
answers become clear: the consequences of bad habits are delayed while the
rewards are immediate. Smoking might kill you in ten years, but it reduces stress
and eases your nicotine cravings now. Overeating is harmful in the long run but
appetizing in the moment. Sex—safe or not—provides pleasure right away.
Disease and infection won’t show up for days or weeks, even years.

Every habit produces multiple outcomes across time. Unfortunately, these
outcomes are often misaligned. With our bad habits, the immediate outcome
usually feels good, but the ultimate outcome feels bad. With good habits, it is the
reverse: the immediate outcome is unenjoyable, but the ultimate outcome feels
good. The French economist Frédéric Bastiat explained the problem clearly
when he wrote, “It almost always happens that when the immediate consequence
is favorable, the later consequences are disastrous, and vice versa. . . . Often, the
sweeter the first fruit of a habit, the more bitter are its later fruits.”

Put another way, the costs of your good habits are in the present. The costs of
your bad habits are in the future.

The brain’s tendency to prioritize the present moment means you can’t rely on
good intentions. When you make a plan—to lose weight, write a book, or learn a
language—you are actually making plans for your future self. And when you
envision what you want your life to be like, it is easy to see the value in taking
actions with long-term benefits. We all want better lives for our future selves.
However, when the moment of decision arrives, instant gratification usually
wins. You are no longer making a choice for Future You, who dreams of being
fitter or wealthier or happier. You are choosing for Present You, who wants to be
full, pampered, and entertained. As a general rule, the more immediate pleasure
you get from an action, the more strongly you should question whether it aligns
with your long-term goals.*

With a fuller understanding of what causes our brain to repeat some behaviors
and avoid others, let’s update the Cardinal Rule of Behavior Change: What is
immediately rewarded is repeated. What is immediately punished is avoided.

Our preference for instant gratification reveals an important truth about
success: because of how we are wired, most people will spend all day chasing
quick hits of satisfaction. The road less traveled is the road of delayed
gratification. If you’re willing to wait for the rewards, you'll face less
competition and often get a bigger payoff. As the saying goes, the last mile is
always the least crowded.

This is precisely what research has shown. People who are better at delaying
gratification have higher SAT scores, lower levels of substance abuse, lower
likelihood of obesity, better responses to stress, and superior social skills. We’ve
all seen this play out in our own lives. If you delay watching television and get
your homework done, you’ll generally learn more and get better grades. If you
don’t buy desserts and chips at the store, you’ll often eat healthier food when
you get home. At some point, success in nearly every field requires you to ignore
an immediate reward in favor of a delayed reward.
Here’s the problem: most people know that delaying gratification is the wise
approach. They want the benefits of good habits: to be healthy, productive, at
peace. But these outcomes are seldom top-of-mind at the decisive moment.
Thankfully, it’s possible to train yourself to delay gratification—but you need to
work with the grain of human nature, not against it. The best way to do this is to
add a little bit of immediate pleasure to the habits that pay off in the long-run
and a little bit of immediate pain to ones that don’t.

HOW TO TURN INSTANT GRATIFICATION TO YOUR ADVANTAGE

The vital thing in getting a habit to stick is to feel successful—even if it’s in a
small way. The feeling of success is a signal that your habit paid off and that the
work was worth the effort.

In a perfect world, the reward for a good habit is the habit itself. In the real
world, good habits tend to feel worthwhile only after they have provided you
with something. Early on, it’s all sacrifice. You’ve gone to the gym a few times,
but you’re not stronger or fitter or faster—at least, not in any noticeable sense.
It’s only months later, once you shed a few pounds or your arms gain some
definition, that it becomes easier to exercise for its own sake. In the beginning,
you need a reason to stay on track. This is why immediate rewards are essential.
They keep you excited while the delayed rewards accumulate in the background.

What we’re really talking about here—when we’re discussing immediate
rewards—is the ending of a behavior. The ending of any experience is vital
because we tend to remember it more than other phases. You want the ending of
your habit to be satisfying. The best approach is to use reinforcement, which
refers to the process of using an immediate reward to increase the rate of a
behavior. Habit stacking, which we covered in Chapter 5, ties your habit to an
immediate cue, which makes it obvious when to start. Reinforcement ties your
habit to an immediate reward, which makes it satisfying when you finish.

Immediate reinforcement can be especially helpful when dealing with habits
of avoidance, which are behaviors you want to stop doing. It can be challenging
to stick with habits like “no frivolous purchases” or “no alcohol this month”
because nothing happens when you skip happy hour drinks or don’t buy that pair
of shoes. It can be hard to feel satisfied when there is no action in the first place.
All you’re doing is resisting temptation, and there isn’t much satisfying about
that.

One solution is to turn the situation on its head. You want to make avoidance
visible. Open a savings account and label it for something you want—maybe
“Leather Jacket.” Whenever you pass on a purchase, put the same amount of
money in the account. Skip your morning latte? Transfer $5. Pass on another
month of Netflix? Move $10 over. It’s like creating a loyalty program for
yourself. The immediate reward of seeing yourself save money toward the
leather jacket feels a lot better than being deprived. You are making it satisfying
to do nothing.

One of my readers and his wife used a similar setup. They wanted to stop
eating out so much and start cooking together more. They labeled their savings
account “Trip to Europe.” Whenever they skipped going out to eat, they
transferred $50 into the account. At the end of the year, they put the money
toward the vacation.

It is worth noting that it is important to select short-term rewards that
reinforce your identity rather than ones that conflict with it. Buying a new jacket
is fine if you’re trying to lose weight or read more books, but it doesn’t work if
you’re trying to budget and save money. Instead, taking a bubble bath or going
on a leisurely walk are good examples of rewarding yourself with free time,
which aligns with your ultimate goal of more freedom and _ financial
independence. Similarly, if your reward for exercising is eating a bowl of ice
cream, then you’re casting votes for conflicting identities, and it ends up being a
wash. Instead, maybe your reward is a massage, which is both a luxury and a
vote toward taking care of your body. Now the short-term reward is aligned with
your long-term vision of being a healthy person.

Eventually, as intrinsic rewards like a better mood, more energy, and reduced
stress kick in, you’ll become less concerned with chasing the secondary reward.
The identity itself becomes the reinforcer. You do it because it’s who you are
and it feels good to be you. The more a habit becomes part of your life, the less
you need outside encouragement to follow through. Incentives can start a habit.
Identity sustains a habit.

That said, it takes time for the evidence to accumulate and a new identity to
emerge. Immediate reinforcement helps maintain motivation in the short term
while you’re waiting for the long-term rewards to arrive.

In summary, a habit needs to be enjoyable for it to last. Simple bits of
reinforcement—like soap that smells great or toothpaste that has a refreshing
mint flavor or seeing $50 hit your savings account—can offer the immediate
pleasure you need to enjoy a habit. And change is easy when it is enjoyable.
Chapter Summary

16
How to Stick with Good Habits Every Day

I. 13, a bank in Abbotsford, Canada, hired a twenty-three-year-old stockbroker

named Trent Dyrsmid. Abbotsford was a relatively small suburb, tucked away in
the shadow of nearby Vancouver, where most of the big business deals were
being made. Given the location, and the fact that Dyrsmid was a rookie, nobody
expected too much of him. But he made brisk progress thanks to a simple daily
habit.

Dyrsmid began each morning with two jars on his desk. One was filled with
120 paper clips. The other was empty. As soon as he settled in each day, he
would make a sales call. Immediately after, he would move one paper clip from
the full jar to the empty jar and the process would begin again. “Every morning I
would start with 120 paper clips in one jar and I would keep dialing the phone
until I had moved them all to the second jar,” he told me.

Within eighteen months, Dyrsmid was bringing in $5 million to the firm. By
age twenty-four, he was making $75,000 per year—the equivalent of $125,000
today. Not long after, he landed a six-figure job with another company.

T like to refer to this technique as the Paper Clip Strategy and, over the years,
One woman
shifted a hairpin from one container to another whenever she wrote a page of her
book. Another man moved a marble from one bin to the next after each set of
push-ups.

Making progress is satisfying, and visual measures—like moving paper clips

As a result,
they reinforce your behavior and add a little bit of immediate satisfaction to any
activity. Visual measurement comes in many forms: food journals, workout logs,
loyalty punch cards, the progress bar on a software download, even the page
numbers in a book. But perhaps the best way to measure your progress is with a
habit tracker.

HOW TO KEEP YOUR HABITS ON TRACK

A habit tracker is a simple way to measure whether you did a habit. The most

For example, if you meditate on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, each
of those dates gets an X. As time rolls by, the calendar becomes a record of your
habit streak.

Countless people have tracked their habits, but perhaps the most famous was
Benjamin Franklin. Beginning at age twenty, Franklin carried a small booklet
everywhere he went and used it to track thirteen personal virtues. This list
included goals like “Lose no time. Be always employed in something useful”
and “Avoid trifling conversation.” At the end of each day, Franklin would open
his booklet and record his progress.

Jerry Seinfeld reportedly uses a habit tracker to stick with his streak of writing
jokes. In the documentary Comedian, he explains that his goal is simply to
“never break the chain” of writing jokes every day. In other words, he is not
focused on how good or bad a particular joke is or how inspired he feels. He is
simply focused on showing up and adding to his streak.

Don’t break the chain of sales
calls and you’ll build a successful book of business. Don’t break the chain of
workouts and you’ll get fit faster than you’d expect. Don’t break the chain of
creating every day and you will end up with an impressive portfolio. Habit

Let’s break down each one.

Benefit #1: Habit tracking is obvious.

Habit
tracking naturally builds a series of visual cues like the streak of X’s on your
calendar or the list of meals in your food log. When you look at the calendar and
see your streak, you’ll be reminded to act again. Research has shown that people
who track their progress on goals like losing weight, quitting smoking, and
lowering blood pressure are all more likely to improve than those who don’t.
One study of more than sixteen hundred people found that those who kept a
daily food log lost twice as much weight as those who did not. The mere act of
tracking a behavior can spark the urge to change it.

Habit tracking also keeps you honest. Most of us have a distorted view of our
own behavior. We think we act better than we do. Measurement offers one way
to overcome our blindness to our own behavior and notice what’s really going
on each day. One glance at the paper clips in the container and you immediately
know how much work you have (or haven’t) been putting in. When the evidence
is right in front of you, you’re less likely to lie to yourself.

Benefit #2: Habit tracking is attractive.

Benefit #3: Habit tracking is satisfying.

This is the most crucial benefit of all. Tracking can become its own form of
reward. It is satisfying to cross an item off your to-do list, to complete an entry
It feels good to watch your
results grow—the size of your investment portfolio, the length of your book
manuscript—and if it feels good, then you’re more likely to endure.

Habit tracking also helps keep your eye on the ball: you’re focused on the
process rather than the result. You’re not fixated on getting six-pack abs, you’re
just trying to keep the streak alive and become the type of person who doesn’t
miss workouts.

In summary,

Furthermore, habit tracking provides visual
proof that you are casting votes for the type of person you wish to become,
which is a delightful form of immediate and intrinsic gratification.*

You may be wondering, if habit tracking is so useful, why have I waited so
long to talk about it?

Despite all the benefits, I’ve left this discussion until now for a simple reason:
many people resist the idea of tracking and measuring. It can feel like a burden
because it forces you into two habits: the habit you’re trying to build and the
habit of tracking it. Counting calories sounds like a hassle when you’re already
struggling to follow a diet. Writing down every sales call seems tedious when
you’ve got work to do. It feels easier to say, “I’ll just eat less.” Or, “I’ll try
harder.” Or, “I’ll remember to do it.” People inevitably tell me things like, “I
have a decision journal, but I wish I used it more.” Or, “I recorded my workouts
for a week, but then quit.” I’ve been there myself. I once made a food log to
track my calories. I managed to do it for one meal and then gave up.

What can we do to make tracking easier?

First, whenever possible, measurement should be automated. You’ll probably
be surprised by how much you’re already tracking without knowing it. Your
credit card statement tracks how often you go out to eat. Your Fitbit registers
how many steps you take and how long you sleep. Your calendar records how
many new places you travel to each year. Once you know where to get the data,
add a note to your calendar to review it each week or each month, which is more
practical than tracking it every day.

Second, manual tracking should be limited to your most important habits. It is
better to consistently track one habit than to sporadically track ten.

Finally, record each measurement immediately after the habit occurs. The
completion of the behavior is the cue to write it down. This approach allows you
to combine the habitstacking method mentioned in Chapter 5 with habit tracking.

° After I hang up the phone from a sales call, I will move one paper clip
over.

° After I finish each set at the gym, I will record it in my workout
journal.

° After I put my plate in the dishwasher, I will write down what I ate.

These tactics can make tracking your habits easier. Even if you aren’t the type
of person who enjoys recording your behavior, I think you’ll find a few weeks of
measurements to be insightful. It’s always interesting to see how you’ve actually
been spending your time.

That said, every habit streak ends at some point. And, more important than
any single measurement, is having a good plan for when your habits slide off
track.

HOW TO RECOVER QUICKLY WHEN YOUR HABITS BREAK DOWN

Before long, an
emergency will pop up—you get sick or you have to travel for work or your
family needs a little more of your time.

Whenever this happens to me, I try to remind myself of a simple rulef/never

Maybe I’ll eat an
entire pizza, but I’ll follow it up with a healthy meal. I can’t be perfect, but I can
avoid a second lapse. As soon as one streak ends, I get started on the next one.

This is a distinguishing feature between winners and losers. Anyone can have
a bad performance, a bad workout, or a bad day at work. But When)Ssticcéessfiil

I think this principle is so important that I’ll stick to it even if I can’t do a
habit as well or as completely as I would like. Too often, we fall into an all-or-
nothing cycle with our habits. The problem is not slipping up; the problem is
thinking that if you can’t do something perfectly, then you shouldn’t do it at all.

You don’t realize how valuable it is to just show up on your bad (or busy)
days. Lost days hurt you more than successful days help you. If you start with
$100, then a 50 percent gain will take you to $150. But you only need a 33
percent loss to take you back to $100. In other words, avoiding a 33 percent loss

is just as valuable as achieving a 50 percent gain. As/Charlie) Munger Says) “The

This is why the “bad” workouts are often the most important ones. Sluggish
days and bad workouts maintain the compound gains you accrued from previous
good days. Simply doing something—ten squats, five sprints, a push-up,
anything really—is huge. Don’t put up a zero. Don’t let losses eat into your
compounding.

Furthermore, it’s not always about what happens during the workout. It’s
about being the type of person who doesn’t miss workouts. It’s easy to train
when you feel good, but it’s crucial to show up when you don’t feel like it—
even if you do less than you hope. Going to the gym for five minutes may not
improve your performance, but it reaffirms your identity.

The all-or-nothing cycle of behavior change is just one pitfall that can derail
your habits. Another potential danger—especially if you are using a habit tracker
—is measuring the wrong thing.

KNOWING WHEN (AND WHEN NOT) TO TRACK A HABIT

Say you’re running a restaurant and you want to know if your chef is doing a
good job. One way to measure success is to track how many customers pay for a
meal each day. If more customers come in, the food must be good. If fewer
customers come in, something must be wrong.

However, this one measurement—daily revenue—only gives a limited picture
of what’s really going on. Just because someone pays for a meal doesn’t mean
they enjoy the meal. Even dissatisfied customers are unlikely to dine and dash.
In fact, if you’re only measuring revenue, the food might be getting worse but
you’re making up for it with marketing or discounts or some other method.
Instead, it may be more effective to track how many customers finish their meal
or perhaps the percentage of customers who leave a generous tip.

the: number rather than the purpose behind it, If your success is measured by

quarterly earnings, you will optimize sales, revenue, and accounting for
quarterly earnings. If your success is measured by a lower number on the scale,
you will optimize for a lower number on the scale, even if that means embracing

crash diets, juice cleanses, and fat-loss pills. The) human) mind wants) to) “win”

This pitfall is evident in many areas of life. We focus on working long hours

instead of getting meaningful work done. Wé)/caré) more) about getting ten
thousand steps than we do about being healthy. We teach for standardized tests
instead of emphasizing learning, curiosity, and critical thinking. In short, we

This is sometimes referred to as Goodhart’s Law. Named after the economist

Charles Goodhart, the principle states, “Wheén)a)méasure) becomes a) target) it

ceases to bea) good measure!” Measurement is only useful when it guides you

and adds context to a larger picture, not when it consumes you. Each number is
simply one piece of feedback in the overall system.

In our data-driven world, we tend to overvalue numbers and undervalue
anything ephemeral, soft, and difficult to quantify. We mistakenly think the
factors we can measure are the only factors that exist. But just because you can
measure something doesn’t mean it’s the most important thing. And just because
you can’t measure something doesn’t mean it’s not important at all.

All of this to say, it’s crucial to keep habit tracking in its proper place. It can
feel satisfying to record a habit and track your progress, but the measurement is
not the only thing that matters. Furthermore, there are many ways to measure
progress, and sometimes it helps to shift your focus to something entirely
different.

This is why nonscale victories can be effective for weight loss. The number
on the scale may be stubborn, so if you focus solely on that number, your
motivation will sag. But you may notice that your skin looks better or you wake
up earlier or your sex drive got a boost. All of these are valid ways to track your

improvement. If you're not feeling motivated by the number on the scale,

Way to make your habits more satisfying) Each measurement provides a little bit

of evidence that you’re moving in the right direction and a brief moment of
immediate pleasure for a job well done.

Chapter Summary

17

How an Accountability Partner Can Change
Everything

Aan servinc as A Pilot in World War II, Roger Fisher attended Harvard Law School

and spent thirty-four years specializing in negotiation and conflict management.
He founded the Harvard Negotiation Project and worked with numerous
countries and world leaders on peace resolutions, hostage crises, and diplomatic
compromises. But it was in the 1970s and 1980s, as the threat of nuclear war
escalated, that Fisher developed perhaps his most interesting idea.

At the time, Fisher was focused on designing strategies that could prevent
nuclear war, and he had noticed a troubling fact. Any sitting president would
have access to launch codes that could kill millions of people but would never
actually see anyone die because he would always be thousands of miles away.

“My suggestion was quite simple,” he wrote in 1981. “Put that [nuclear] code
number in a little capsule, and then implant that capsule right next to the heart of
a volunteer. The volunteer would carry with him a big, heavy butcher knife as he
accompanied the President. If ever the President wanted to fire nuclear weapons,
the only way he could do so would be for him first, with his own hands, to kill
one human being. The President says, ‘George, I’m sorry but tens of millions
must die.” He has to look at someone and realize what death is—what an
innocent death is. Blood on the White House carpet. It’s reality brought home.

“When I suggested this to friends in the Pentagon they said, ‘My God, that’s
terrible. Having to kill someone would distort the President’s judgment. He
might never push the button.’”

Throughout our discussion of the 4th Law of Behavior Change we have
covered the importance of making good habits immediately satisfying. Fisher’s
proposal is an inversion of the 4th Law: Make it immediately unsatisfying.

Just as we are more likely to repeat an experience when the ending is
satisfying, we are also more likely to avoid an experience when the ending is
painful. Pain is an effective teacher. If a failure is painful, it gets fixed. If a
failure is relatively painless, it gets ignored. The more immediate and more
costly a mistake is, the faster you will learn from it. The threat of a bad review
forces a plumber to be good at his job. The possibility of a customer never
returning makes restaurants create good food. The cost of cutting the wrong
blood vessel makes a surgeon master human anatomy and cut carefully. When
the consequences are severe, people learn quickly.

The more immediate the pain, the less likely the behavior. If you want to
prevent bad habits and eliminate unhealthy behaviors, then adding an instant cost
to the action is a great way to reduce their odds.

We repeat bad habits because they serve us in some way, and that makes them
hard to abandon. The best way I know to overcome this predicament is to
increase the speed of the punishment associated with the behavior. There can’t
be a gap between the action and the consequences.

As soon as actions incur an immediate consequence, behavior begins to
change. Customers pay their bills on time when they are charged a late fee.
Students show up to class when their grade is linked to attendance. We’ll jump
through a lot of hoops to avoid a little bit of immediate pain.

There is, of course, a limit to this. If you’re going to rely on punishment to
change behavior, then the strength of the punishment must match the relative
strength of the behavior it is trying to correct. To be productive, the cost of
procrastination must be greater than the cost of action. To be healthy, the cost of
laziness must be greater than the cost of exercise. Getting fined for smoking in a
restaurant or failing to recycle adds consequence to an action. Behavior only
shifts if the punishment is painful enough and reliably enforced.

In general, the more local, tangible, concrete, and immediate the consequence,
the more likely it is to influence individual behavior. The more global,
intangible, vague, and delayed the consequence, the less likely it is to influence
individual behavior.

Thankfully, there is a straightforward way to add an immediate cost to any
bad habit: create a habit contract.

THE HABIT CONTRACT

The first seat belt law was passed in New York on December 1, 1984. At the
time, just 14 percent of people in the United States regularly wore a seat belt—
but that was all about to change.

Within five years, over half of the nation had seat belt laws. Today, wearing a
seat belt is enforceable by law in forty-nine of the fifty states. And it’s not just
the legislation, the number of people wearing seat belts has changed dramatically
as well. In 2016, over 88 percent of Americans buckled up each time they got in
a car. In just over thirty years, there was a complete reversal in the habits of
millions of people.

Laws and regulations are an example of how government can change our
habits by creating a social contract. As a society, we collectively agree to abide
by certain rules and then enforce them as a group. Whenever a new piece of
legislation impacts behavior—seat belt laws, banning smoking inside
restaurants, mandatory recycling—it is an example of a social contract shaping
our habits. The group agrees to act in a certain way, and if you don’t follow
along, you’ll be punished.

Just as governments use laws to hold citizens accountable, you can create a
habit contract to hold yourself accountable. A habit contract is a verbal or
written agreement in which you state your commitment to a particular habit and
the punishment that will occur if you don’t follow through. Then you find one or
two people to act as your accountability partners and sign off on the contract
with you.

Bryan Harris, an entrepreneur from Nashville, Tennessee, was the first person
I saw put this strategy into action. Shortly after the birth of his son, Harris
realized he wanted to shed a few pounds. He wrote up a habit contract between
himself, his wife, and his personal trainer. The first version read, “Bryan’s #1
objective for Q1 of 2017 is to start eating correctly again so he feels better, looks
better, and is able to hit his long-term goal of 200 pounds at 10% body fat.”

Below that statement, Harris laid out a road map for achieving his ideal
outcome:

Phase #1: Get back to a strict “slow-carb” diet in Q1.
Phase #2: Start a strict macronutrient tracking program in Q2.

e Phase #3: Refine and maintain the details of his diet and workout
program in Q3.

Finally, he wrote out each of the daily habits that would get him to his goal.
For example, “Write down all food that he consumes each day and weigh
himself each day.”

And then he listed the punishment if he failed: “If Bryan doesn’t do these two
items then the following consequence will be enforced: He will have to dress up
each workday and each Sunday morning for the rest of the quarter. Dress up is
defined as not wearing jeans, t-shirts, hoodies, or shorts. He will also give Joey
(his trainer) $200 to use as he sees fit if he misses one day of logging food.”

At the bottom of the page, Harris, his wife, and his trainer all signed the
contract.

My initial reaction was that a contract like this seemed overly formal and
unnecessary, especially the signatures. But Harris convinced me that signing the
contract was an indication of seriousness. “Anytime I skip this part,” he said, “I
start slacking almost immediately.”

Three months later, after hitting his targets for Q1, Harris upgraded his goals.
The consequences escalated, too. If he missed his carbohydrate and protein
targets, he had to pay his trainer $100. And if he failed to weigh himself, he had
to give his wife $500 to use as she saw fit. Perhaps most painfully, if he forgot to
run sprints, he had to dress up for work every day and wear an Alabama hat the
rest of the quarter—the bitter rival of his beloved Auburn team.

The strategy worked. With his wife and trainer acting as accountability
partners and with the habit contract clarifying exactly what to do each day,
Harris lost the weight.*

To make bad habits unsatisfying, your best option is to make them painful in
the moment. Creating a habit contract is a straightforward way to do exactly that.

Even if you don’t want to create a full-blown habit contract, simply having an
accountability partner is useful. The comedian Margaret Cho writes a joke or
song every day. She does the “song a day” challenge with a friend, which helps
them both stay accountable. Knowing that someone is watching can be a
powerful motivator. You are less likely to procrastinate or give up because there
is an immediate cost. If you don’t follow through, perhaps they’ll see you as
untrustworthy or lazy. Suddenly, you are not only failing to uphold your
promises to yourself, but also failing to uphold your promises to others.

You can even automate this process. Thomas Frank, an entrepreneur in
Boulder, Colorado, wakes up at 5:55 each morning. And if he doesn’t, he has a
tweet automatically scheduled that says, “It’s 6:10 and I’m not up because I’m
lazy! Reply to this for $5 via PayPal (limit 5), assuming my alarm didn’t
malfunction.”

We are always trying to present our best selves to the world. We comb our
hair and brush our teeth and dress ourselves carefully because we know these
habits are likely to get a positive reaction. We want to get good grades and
graduate from top schools to impress potential employers and mates and our
friends and family. We care about the opinions of those around us because it
helps if others like us. This is precisely why getting an accountability partner or
signing a habit contract can work so well.
Chapter Summary

HOW TO CREATE A GOOD HABIT

he 1st Law: Make It Obvious|

1.1; Fill out the Habits Scorecard. Write down your current habits to become aware of them.
1,2: Use implementation intentions: “1 will [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCATION].”
1,3: Use habit stacking: “After [CURRENT HABIT], | will [NEW HABIT].”

1.4; Design your environment. Make the cues of good habits obvious and visible.

The 2nd Law:Make It Attractive

2.1: Use temptation buiidling. Pair an action you want to do with an action you need to do.
2.2: Join a culture where your desired behavior is the normal behavior.
2.3: Create a motivation ritual. Do something you enjoy immediately before a difficult habit.

(The 3rd Law: Make It Easy

3.1: Reduce friction. Decrease the number of steps between you and your good habits.
3.2: Prime the environment. Prepare your environment to make future actions easier.

3.3: Master the decisive moment. Optimize the small choices that deliver outsized impact.

3.4: Use the Two-Minute Rule. Downscale your habits until they can be done in two minutes or less.
3.5: Automate your habits. Invest in technology and onetime purchases that lock in future behavior.

he 4th Law: Make It Satisfying

4,1: Use reinforcement, Give yourself an immediate reward when you complete your habit.
4.2: Make “doing nothing” enjoyable. When avoiding a bad habit, design a way to see the benefits,
4.3: Use a habit tracker. Keep track of your habit streak and “don’t break the chain.”

4.4: Never miss twice. When you forget to do a habit, make sure you get back on track immediately.

HOW TO BREAK A BAD HABIT

Inversion of the 1st Law: Make It Invisible}
1.5: Reduce exposure. Remove the cues of your bad habits from your environment.

Inversion of the 2nd Law: Make It Unattractive

2.4: Reframe your mind-set. Highlight the benefits of avoiding your bad habits.

inversion of the 3rd Law: Make It Difficul

3.6: Increase friction. Increase the number of steps between you and your bad habits.
3.7: Use a commitment device, Restrict your future choices to the ones that benefit you,

Inversion of the 4th Law: Make It Unsatisfying

4.5: Get an accountability partner. Ask someone to watch your behavior.
4.6: Create a habit contract. Make the costs of your bad habits public and painful.

You can download a printable version of this habits cheat sheet at: atomichabits.com/cheatsheet
ADVANCED TACTICS

How to Go from Being Merely Good to Being
Truly Great
18

The Truth About Talent (When Genes Matter
and When They Don’t)

Yo aeefamiliar with Michael Phelps, who is widely considered to be one of

the greatest athletes in history. Phelps has won more Olympic medals not only
than any swimmer but also more than any Olympian in any sport.

Fewer people know the name Hicham El Guerrouj, but he was a fantastic
athlete in his own right. El Guerrouj is a Moroccan runner who holds two
Olympic gold medals and is one of the greatest middle-distance runners of all
time. For many years, he held the world record in the mile, 1,500-meter, and
2,000-meter races. At the Olympic Games in Athens, Greece, in 2004, he won
gold in the 1,500-meter and 5,000-meter races.

These two athletes are wildly different in many ways. (For starters, one
competed on land and the other in water.) But most notably, they differ
significantly in height. El Guerrouj is five feet, nine inches tall. Phelps is six
feet, four inches tall. Despite this seven-inch difference in height, the two men
are identical in one respect: Michael Phelps and Hicham El Guerrouj wear the
same length inseam on their pants.

How is this possible? Phelps has relatively short legs for his height and a very
long torso, the perfect build for swimming. El Guerrouj has incredibly long legs
and a short upper body, an ideal frame for distance running.

Now, imagine if these world-class athletes were to switch sports. Given his
remarkable athleticism, could Michael Phelps become an Olympic-caliber
distance runner with enough training? It’s unlikely. At peak fitness, Phelps
weighed 194 pounds, which is 40 percent heavier than El Guerrouj, who
competed at an ultralight 138 pounds. Taller runners are heavier runners, and
every extra pound is a curse when it comes to distance running. Against elite
competition, Phelps would be doomed from the start.

Similarly, El Guerrouj might be one of the best runners in history, but it’s
doubtful he would ever qualify for the Olympics as a swimmer. Since 1976, the
average height of Olympic gold medalists in the men’s 1,500-meter run is five
feet, ten inches. In comparison, the average height of Olympic gold medalists in
the men’s 100-meter freestyle swim is six feet, four inches. Swimmers tend to be
tall and have long backs and arms, which are ideal for pulling through the water.
El] Guerrouj would be at a severe disadvantage before he ever touched the pool.

. Like Michael Phelps in the
pool or Hicham El Guerrouj on the track, you want to play a game where the
odds are in your favor.

the surface, your genes seem to be fixed, and it’s no fun to talk about things you
cannot control. Plus, phrases like biological determinism makes it sound like
certain individuals are destined for success and others doomed to failure. But
this is a shortsighted view of the influence of genes on behavior.

. If you
want to dunk a basketball, being seven feet tall is very useful. If you want to
perform a gymnastics routine, being seven feet tall is a great hindrance. Our
environment determines the suitability of our genes and the utility of our natural
talents. When our environment changes, so do the qualities that determine
success.

This is true not just for physical characteristics but for mental ones as well.
I’m smart if you ask me about habits and human behavior; not so much when it
comes to knitting, rocket propulsion, or guitar chords. Competence is highly
dependent on context.

. And this is why, if you want to be truly great,
selecting the right place to focus is crucial.

In short: genes do not determine your destiny. They determine your areas of
opportunity. As physician Gabor Mate notes, “Genes can predispose, but they
don’t predetermine.” The areas where you are genetically predisposed to success
are the areas where habits are more likely to be satisfying. The key is to direct
your effort toward areas that both excite you and match your natural skills, to
align your ambition with your ability.
The obvious question is, “How do I figure out where the odds are in my
favor? How do I identify the opportunities and habits that are right for me?” The
first place we will look for an answer is by understanding your personality.

HOW YOUR PERSONALITY INFLUENCES YOUR HABITS

Your genes are operating beneath the surface of every habit. Indeed, beneath the
surface of every behavior. Genes have been shown to influence everything from
the number of hours you spend watching television to your likelihood to marry
or divorce to your tendency to get addicted to drugs, alcohol, or nicotine. There’s
a strong genetic component to how obedient or rebellious you are when facing
authority, how vulnerable or resistant you are to stressful events, how proactive
or reactive you tend to be, and even how captivated or bored you feel during
sensory experiences like attending a concert. As Robert Plomin, a behavioral
geneticist at King’s College in London, told me, “It is now at the point where we
have stopped testing to see if traits have a genetic component because we
literally can’t find a single one that isn’t influenced by our genes.”

Bundled together, your unique cluster of genetic traits predispose you to a
particular personality. Your personality is the set of characteristics that is
consistent from situation to situation. The most proven scientific analysis of
personality traits is known as the “Big Five,” which breaks them down into five
spectrums of behavior.

All five characteristics have biological underpinnings. Extroversion, for
instance, can be tracked from birth. If scientists play a loud noise in the nursing
ward, some babies turn toward it while others turn away. When the researchers
tracked these children through life, they found that the babies who turned toward
the noise were more likely to grow up to be extroverts. Those who turned away
were more likely to become introverts.

People who are high in agreeableness are kind, considerate, and warm. They
also tend to have higher natural oxytocin levels, a hormone that plays an
important role in social bonding, increases feelings of trust, and can act as a
natural antidepressant. You can easily imagine how someone with more
oxytocin might be inclined to build habits like writing thank-you notes or
organizing social events.

As a third example, consider neuroticism, which is a personality trait all
people possess to various degrees. People who are high in neuroticism tend to be
anxious and worry more than others. This trait has been linked to
hypersensitivity of the amygdala, the portion of the brain responsible for
noticing threats. In other words, people who are more sensitive to negative cues
in their environment are more likely to score high in neuroticism.

Our habits are not solely determined by our personalities, but there is no doubt
that our genes nudge us in a certain direction. Our deeply rooted preferences
make certain behaviors easier for some people than for others. You don’t have to
apologize for these differences or feel guilty about them, but you do have to
work with them. A person who scores lower on conscientiousness, for example,
will be less likely to be orderly by nature and may need to rely more heavily on
environment design to stick with good habits. (As a reminder for the less
conscientious readers among us, environment design is a strategy we discussed
in Chapters 6 and 12.)

The takeaway is that you should build habits that work for your personality.*
People can get ripped working out like a bodybuilder, but if you prefer rock
climbing or cycling or rowing, then shape your exercise habit around your
interests. If your friend follows a low-carb diet but you find that low-fat works
for you, then more power to you. If you want to read more, don’t be embarrassed
if you prefer steamy romance novels over nonfiction. Read whatever fascinates
you.* You don’t have to build the habits everyone tells you to build. Choose the
habit that best suits you, not the one that is most popular.

There is a version of every habit that can bring you joy and satisfaction. Find
it. Habits need to be enjoyable if they are going to stick. This is the core idea
behind the 4th Law.

Tailoring your habits to your personality is a good start, but this is not the end
of the story. Let’s turn our attention to finding and designing situations where
you’re at a natural advantage.
HOW TO FIND A GAME WHERE THE ODDS ARE IN YOUR FAVOR

Leaming to play a game where the odds are in your favor is critical for
maintaining motivation and feeling successful. In theory, you can enjoy almost
anything. In practice, you are more likely to enjoy the things that come easily to
you. People who are talented in a particular area tend to be more competent at
that task and are then praised for doing a good job. They stay energized because
they are making progress where others have failed, and because they get
rewarded with better pay and bigger opportunities, which not only makes them
happier but also propels them to produce even higher-quality work. It’s a
virtuous cycle.

Pick the right habit and progress is easy. Pick the wrong habit and life is a
struggle.

How do you pick the right habit? The first step is something we covered in the
3rd Law: make it easy. In many cases, when people pick the wrong habit, it
simply means they picked a habit that was too difficult. When a habit is easy,
you are more likely to be successful. When you are successful, you are more
likely to feel satisfied. However, there is another level to consider. In the long-
run, if you continue to advance and improve, any area can become challenging.
At some point, you need to make sure you’re playing the right game for your
skillset. How do you figure that out?

The most common approach is trial and error. Of course, there’s a problem
with this strategy: life is short. You don’t have time to try every career, date
every eligible bachelor, or play every musical instrument. Thankfully, there is an
effective way to manage this conundrum, and it is known as the explore/exploit
trade-off.

it’s called split testing. The goal is to try out many possibilities, research a broad
range of ideas, and cast a wide net.

After this initial period of exploration, shift your focus to the best solution
proper balance
depends on whether you’re winning or losing. If you are currently winning, you
exploit, exploit, exploit. If you are currently losing, you continue to explore,
explore, explore.

In the long-run it is probably most effective to work on the strategy that seems
to deliver the best results about 80 to 90 percent of the time and keep exploring
with the remaining 10 to 20 percent. Google famously asks employees to spend
80 percent of the workweek on their official job and 20 percent on projects of

their choice, which has led to the creation of blockbuster products like AdWords
and Gmail.

The optimal approach also depends on how much time you have. If you have
a lot of time—like someone at the beginning of their career—it makes more
sense to explore because once you find the right thing, you still have a good
amount of time to exploit it. If you’re pressed for time—say, as you come up on
the deadline for a project—you should implement the best solution you’ve found
so far and get some results.

As you explore different options, there are a series of questions you can ask
yourself to continually narrow in on the habits and areas that will be most
satisfying to you:

What feels like fun to me, but work to others? The mark of whether you
are made for a task is not whether you love it but whether you can handle
the pain of the task easier than most people. When are you enjoying
yourself while other people are complaining? The work that hurts you less
than it hurts others is the work you were made to do.

What makes me lose track of time? Flow is the mental state you enter
when you are so focused on the task at hand that the rest of the world fades
away. This blend of happiness and peak performance is what athletes and
performers experience when they are “in the zone.” It is nearly impossible
to experience a flow state and not find the task satisfying at least to some
degree.

Where do I get greater returns than the average person? We are
continually comparing ourselves to those around us, and a behavior is more
likely to be satisfying when the comparison is in our favor. When I started
writing at jamesclear.com, my email list grew very quickly. I wasn’t quite
sure what I was doing well, but I knew that results seemed to be coming
faster for me than for some of my colleagues, which motivated me to keep
writing.

What comes naturally to me? For just a moment, ignore what you have
been taught. Ignore what society has told you. Ignore what others expect of
you. Look inside yourself and ask, “What feels natural to me? When have I
felt alive? When have I felt like the real me?” No internal judgments or
people-pleasing. No second-guessing or self-criticism. Just feelings of
engagement and enjoyment. Whenever you feel authentic and genuine, you
are headed in the right direction.

To be honest, some of this process is just luck. Michael Phelps and Hicham El
Guerrouj were lucky to be born with a rare set of abilities that are highly valued
by society and to be placed in the ideal environment for those abilities. We all
have limited time on this planet, and the truly great among us are the ones who
not only work hard but also have the good fortune to be exposed to opportunities
that favor us.

But what if you don’t want to leave it up to luck?

If you can’t find a game where the odds are stacked in your favor, create one.
Scott Adams, the cartoonist behind Dilbert, says, “Everyone has at least a few
areas in which they could be in the top 25% with some effort. In my case, I can
draw better than most people, but I’m hardly an artist. And I’m not any funnier
than the average standup comedian who never makes it big, but I’m funnier than
most people. The magic is that few people can draw well and write jokes. It’s the
combination of the two that makes what I do so rare. And when you add in my
business background, suddenly I had a topic that few cartoonists could hope to
understand without living it.”

When you can’t win by being better, you can win by being different. By
combining your skills, you reduce the level of competition, which makes it
easier to stand out. You can shortcut the need for a genetic advantage (or for
years of practice) by rewriting the rules. A good player works hard to win the
game everyone else is playing. A great player creates a new game that favors
their strengths and avoids their weaknesses.

In college, I designed my own major, biomechanics, which was a combination
of physics, chemistry, biology, and anatomy. I wasn’t smart enough to stand out
among the top physics or biology majors, so I created my own game. And
because it suited me—I was only taking the courses I was interested in—
studying felt like less of a chore. It was also easier to avoid the trap of
comparing myself to everyone else. After all, nobody else was taking the same
combination of classes, so who could say if they were better or worse?

with you. Many bodybuilders are stronger than the average arm wrestler, but
even a massive bodybuilder may lose at arm wrestling because the arm wrestling

champ has very specific strength. Even if you’re not the most naturally gifted,
you can often win by being the best in a very narrow category.

Boiling water will soften a potato but harden an egg. You can’t control
whether you’re a potato or an egg, but you can decide to play a game where it’s
better to be hard or soft. If you can find a more favorable environment, you can
transform the situation from one where the odds are against you to one where
they are in your favor.

HOW TO GET THE MOST OUT OF YOUR GENES

Our genes do not eliminate the need for hard work. They clarify it. They tell us
what to work hard on. Once we realize our strengths, we know where to spend
our time and energy. We know which types of opportunities to look for and
which types of challenges to avoid. The better we understand our nature, the
better our strategy can be.

Biological differences matter. Even so, it’s more productive to focus on
whether you are fulfilling your own potential than comparing yourself to
someone else. The fact that you have a natural limit to any specific ability has
nothing to do with whether you are reaching the ceiling of your capabilities.
People get so caught up in the fact that they have limits that they rarely exert the
effort required to get close to them.

Furthermore, genes can’t make you successful if you’re not doing the work.
Yes, it’s possible that the ripped trainer at the gym has better genes, but if you
haven’t put in the same reps, it’s impossible to say if you have been dealt a
better or worse genetic hand. Until you work as hard as those you admire, don’t
explain away their success as luck.
Chapter Summary

19

The Goldilocks Rule: How to Stay Motivated in
Life and Work

I. ss, Disneyland had just opened in Anaheim, California, when a ten-year-old

boy walked in and asked for a job. Labor laws were loose back then and the boy
managed to land a position selling guidebooks for $0.50 apiece.

Within a year, he had transitioned to Disney’s magic shop, where he learned
tricks from the older employees. He experimented with jokes and tried out
simple routines on visitors. Soon he discovered that what he loved was not
performing magic but performing in general. He set his sights on becoming a
comedian.

Beginning in his teenage years, he started performing in little clubs around
Los Angeles. The crowds were small and his act was short. He was rarely on
stage for more than five minutes. Most of the people in the crowd were too busy
drinking or talking with friends to pay attention. One night, he literally delivered
his standup routine to an empty club.

It wasn’t glamorous work, but there was no doubt he was getting better. His
first routines would only last one or two minutes. By high school, his material
had expanded to include a five-minute act and, a few years later, a ten-minute
show. At nineteen, he was performing weekly for twenty minutes at a time. He
had to read three poems during the show just to make the routine long enough,
but his skills continued to progress.

He spent another decade experimenting, adjusting, and practicing. He took a
job as a television writer and, gradually, he was able to land his own appearances
on talk shows. By the mid-1970s, he had worked his way into being a regular
guest on The Tonight Show and Saturday Night Live.

Finally, after nearly fifteen years of work, the young man rose to fame. He
toured sixty cities in sixty-three days. Then seventy-two cities in eighty days.
Then eighty-five cities in ninety days. He had 18,695 people attend one show in
Ohio. Another 45,000 tickets were sold for his three-day show in New York. He
catapulted to the top of his genre and became one of the most successful
comedians of his time.

His name is Steve Martin.

Martin’s story offers a fascinating perspective on what it takes to stick with
habits for the long run. Comedy is not for the timid. It is hard to imagine a
situation that would strike fear into the hearts of more people than performing
alone on stage and failing to get a single laugh. And yet Steve Martin faced this
fear every week for eighteen years. In his words, “10 years spent learning, 4
years spent refining, and 4 years as a wild success.”

Why is it that some people, like Martin, stick with their habits—whether
practicing jokes or drawing cartoons or playing guitar—while most of us
struggle to stay motivated? How do we design habits that pull us in rather than
ones that fade away? Scientists have been studying this question for many years.
While there is still much to learn, one of the most consistent findings is that the

difficulty. If you love tennis and try to play a serious match against a four-year-
old, you will quickly become bored. It’s too easy. You’ll win every point. In
contrast, if you play a professional tennis player like Roger Federer or Serena
Williams, you will quickly lose motivation because the match is too difficult.

Now consider playing tennis against someone who is your equal. As the game
progresses, you win a few points and you lose a few. You have a good chance of
winning, but only if you really try. Your focus narrows, distractions fade away,
and you find yourself fully invested in the task at hand. This is a challenge of
just manageable difficulty and it is a prime example of the Goldilocks Rule.

The Goldilocks Rule states that humans experience peak motivation when
working on tasks that are right on the edge of their current abilities. Not too
hard. Not too easy. Just right.

THE GOLDILOCKS RULE
GOLDILOCKS
ZONE

MOTIVATION

7

BOREDOM FAILURE

DIFFICULTY ————_»

FIGURE 15: Maximum motivation occurs when facing a challenge of just manageable difficulty. In psychology research this is known as the Yerkes-Dodson law, which describes the
optimal level of arousal as the midpoint between boredom and anxiety.

Martin’s comedy career is an excellent example of the Goldilocks Rule in
practice. Each year, he expanded his comedy routine—but only by a minute or
two. He was always adding new material, but he also kept a few jokes that were
guaranteed to get laughs. There were just enough victories to keep him
motivated and just enough mistakes to keep him working hard.

When you’re starting a new habit, it’s important to keep the behavior as easy
. This is
an idea we covered in detail while discussing the 3rd Law of Behavior Change.

Once a habit has been established, however, it’s important to continue to
advance in small ways. These little improvements and new challenges keep you
engaged. And if you hit the Goldilocks Zone just right, you can achieve a flow
state.*

A flow state is the experience of being “in the zone” and fully immersed in an
activity. Scientists have tried to quantify this feeling. They found that to achieve

a state of flow, a task must be roughly 4 percent beyond your current ability. In
real life it’s typically not feasible to quantify the difficulty of an action in this

way, but the core idea of the Goldilocks Rule remains: working on challenges of
just manageable difficulty—something on the perimeter of your ability—seems
crucial for maintaining motivation.

Improvement requires a delicate balance. You need to regularly search for
challenges that push you to your edge while continuing to make enough progress
to stay motivated. Behaviors need to remain novel in order for them to stay
attractive and satisfying. Without variety, we get bored. And boredom is perhaps
the greatest villain on the quest for selfimprovement.

HOW TO STAY FOCUSED WHEN YOU GET BORED WORKING ON
YOUR GOALS

After my baseball career ended, I was looking for a new sport. I joined a
weightlifting team and one day an elite coach visited our gym. He had worked
with thousands of athletes during his long career, including a few Olympians. I
introduced myself and we began talking about the process of improvement.

“What’s the difference between the best athletes and everyone else?” I asked.
“What do the really successful people do that most don’t?”

He mentioned the factors you might expect: genetics, luck, talent. But then he
said something I wasn’t expecting: “At some point it comes down to who can
handle the boredom of training every day, doing the same lifts over and over and
over.”

His answer surprised me because it’s a different way of thinking about work
ethic. People talk about getting “amped up” to work on their goals. Whether it’s
business or sports or art, you hear people say things like, “It all comes down to
passion.” Or, “You have to really want it.” As a result, many of us get depressed
when we lose focus or motivation because we think that successful people have
some bottomless reserve of passion. But this coach was saying that really

successful people feel the same lack of motivation as everyone else. The
difference is that they still find a way to show up despite the feelings of
boredom.

Mastery requires practice. But the more you practice something, the more
boring and routine it becomes. Once the beginner gains have been made and we
learn what to expect, our interest starts to fade. Sometimes it happens even faster
than that. All you have to do is hit the gym a few days in a row or publish a
couple of blog posts on time and letting one day slip doesn’t feel like much.

Things are going well. It’s easy to rationalize taking a day off because you’re in
a good place.
The greatest threat to success is not failure but boredom. We get bored with
habits because they stop delighting us. The outcome becomes expected. And as
our habits become ordinary, we start derailing our progress to seek novelty.
Perhaps this is why we get caught up in a never-ending cycle, jumping from one
workout to the next, one diet to the next, one business idea to the next. As soon
as we experience the slightest dip in motivation, we begin seeking a new strategy
—even if the old one was still working. As Machiavelli noted, “Men desire
novelty to such an extent that those who are doing well wish for a change as
much as those who are doing badly.”

Perhaps this is why many of the most habit-forming products are those that
provide continuous forms of novelty. Video games provide visual novelty. Porn
provides sexual novelty. Junk foods provide culinary novelty. Each of these
experiences offer continual elements of surprise.

In psychology, this is known as a variable reward.* Slot machines are the
most common real-world example. A gambler hits the jackpot every now and
then but not at any predictable interval. The pace of rewards varies. This
variance leads to the greatest spike of dopamine, enhances memory recall, and
accelerates habit formation.

Variable rewards won’t create a craving—that is, you can’t take a reward
people are uninterested in, give it to them at a variable interval, and hope it will
change their mind—but they are a powerful way to amplify the cravings we
already experience because they reduce boredom.

The sweet spot of desire occurs at a 50/50 split between success and failure.
Half of the time you get what you want. Half of the time you don’t. You need
just enough “winning” to experience satisfaction and just enough “wanting” to
experience desire. This is one of the benefits of following the Goldilocks Rule. If
you’re already interested in a habit, working on challenges of just manageable
difficulty is a good way to keep things interesting.

Of course, not all habits have a variable reward component, and you wouldn’t
want them to. If Google only delivered a useful search result some of the time, I
would switch to a competitor pretty quickly. If Uber only picked up half of my
trips, I doubt I’d be using that service much longer. And if I flossed my teeth
each night and only sometimes ended up with a clean mouth, I think I’d skip it.

Variable rewards or not, no habit will stay interesting forever. At some point,
everyone faces the same challenge on the journey of selfimprovement: you have
We all have goals that we would like to achieve and dreams that we would

like to fulfill, but it doesn’t matter what you are trying to become better at, if you
only do the work when it’s convenient or exciting, then you’ll never be
consistent enough to achieve remarkable results.

David Cain, an author and meditation teacher, encourages his students to
avoid being “fair-weather meditators.” Similarly, you don’t want to be a fair-
weather athlete or a fair-weather writer or a fair-weather anything. When a habit
is truly important to you, you have to be willing to stick to it in any mood.
Professionals take action even when the mood isn’t right. They might not enjoy
it, but they find a way to put the reps in.

There have been a lot of sets that I haven’t felt like finishing, but I’ve never
regretted doing the workout. There have been a lot of articles I haven’t felt like
writing, but I’ve never regretted publishing on schedule. There have been a lot of
days I’ve felt like relaxing, but I’ve never regretted showing up and working on
something that was important to me.

The only way to become excellent is to be endlessly fascinated by doing the
same thing over and over. You have to fall in love with boredom.
Chapter Summary
20
The Downside of Creating Good Habits

H.... CREATE THE FOUNDATION For Mastery. 1D chess, it is only after the basic movements of the

pieces have become automatic that a player can focus on the next level of the
game. Each chunk of information that is memorized opens up the mental space
for more effortful thinking. This is true for any endeavor. When you know the
simple movements so well that you can perform them without thinking, you are
free to pay attention to more advanced details. In this way, habits are the
backbone of any pursuit of excellence.

However, the

But then, as a habit becomes automatic, you
become less sensitive to feedback. You fall into mindless repetition. It becomes
easier to let mistakes slide. When you can do it “good enough” on autopilot, you
stop thinking about how to do it better.

The upside of habits is that we can do things without thinking. The downside
attention to little errors: You assume you’re getting better because you’re

gaining experience. In reality, you are merely reinforcing your current habits—
not improving them. In fact, some research has shown that once a skill has been
mastered there is usually a slight decline in performance over time.

Usually, this minor dip in performance is no cause for worry. You don’t need
a system to continuously improve how well you brush your teeth or tie your
shoes or make your morning cup of tea. With habits like these, good enough is
usually good enough. The less energy you spend on trivial choices, the more you
can spend it on what really matters.

However, when you want to maximize your potential and achieve elite levels
of performance, you need a more nuanced approach. You can’t repeat the same
things blindly and expect to become exceptional. Habits are necessary, but not
sufficient for mastery. What you need is a combination of automatic habits and

deliberate practice.

To become great, certain skills do need to become automatic. Basketball
players need to be able to dribble without thinking before they can move on to
mastering layups with their nondominant hand. Surgeons need to repeat the first
incision so many times that they could do it with their eyes closed, so that they
can focus on the hundreds of variables that arise during surgery. But after one
habit has been mastered, you have to return to the effortful part of the work and
begin building the next habit.

Mastery is the process of narrowing your focus to a tiny element of success,
repeating it until you have internalized the skill, and then using this new habit as
the foundation to advance to the next frontier of your development. Old tasks
become easier the second time around, but it doesn’t get easier overall because
now you’re pouring your energy into the next challenge. Each habit unlocks the
next level of performance. It’s an endless cycle.

MASTERING ONE HABIT

AUTOMATICITY

REPETITONS

MASTERING A FIELD
SKILL

REPETITONS

FIGURE 16: The process of mastery requires that you progressively layer improvements on top of one another, each habit building upon the last until a new level of performance has been
reached and a higher range of skills has been internalized.

Although habits are powerful, what you need is a way to remain conscious of
your performance over time, so you can continue to refine and improve. It is
precisely at the moment when you begin to feel like you have mastered a skill—
right when things are starting to feel automatic and you are becoming
comfortable—that you must avoid slipping into the trap of complacency.

The solution? Establish a system for reflection and review.

HOW TO REVIEW YOUR HABITS AND MAKE ADJUSTMENTS

In 1986, the Los Angeles Lakers had one of the most talented basketball teams
ever assembled, but they are rarely remembered that way. The team started the
1985-1986 NBA season with an astounding 29-5 record. “The pundits were
saying that we might be the best team in the history of basketball,” head coach
Pat Riley said after the season. Surprisingly, the Lakers stumbled in the 1986
playoffs and suffered a season-ending defeat in the Western Conference Finals.
The “best team in the history of basketball” didn’t even play for the NBA
championship.

After that blow, Riley was tired of hearing about how much talent his players
had and about how much promise his team held. He didn’t want to see flashes of
brilliance followed by a gradual fade in performance. He wanted the Lakers to
play up to their potential, night after night. In the summer of 1986, he created a
plan to do exactly that, a system that he called the Career Best Effort program or
CBE.

“When players first join the Lakers,” Riley explained, “we track their
basketball statistics all the way back to high school. I call this Taking Their
Number. We look for an accurate gauge of what a player can do, then build him
into our plan for the team, based on the notion that he will maintain and then
improve upon his averages.”

After determining a player’s baseline level of performance, Riley added a key
step. He asked each player to “improve their output by at least 1 percent over the
course of the season. If they succeeded, it would be a CBE, or Career Best
Effort.” Similar to the British Cycling team that we discussed in Chapter 1, the
Lakers sought peak performance by getting slightly better each day.

Riley was careful to point out that CBE was not merely about points or
statistics but about giving your “best effort spiritually and mentally and
physically.” Players got credit for “allowing an opponent to run into you when
you know that a foul will be called against him, diving for loose balls, going
after rebounds whether you are likely to get them or not, helping a teammate
when the player he’s guarding has surged past him, and other ‘unsung hero’
deeds.”

As an example, let’s say that Magic Johnson—the Lakers star player at the
time—had 11 points, 8 rebounds, 12 assists, 2 steals, and 5 turnovers in a game.
Magic also got credit for an “unsung hero” deed by diving after a loose ball (+1).
Finally, he played a total of 33 minutes in this imaginary game.

The positive numbers (11 + 8 + 12 + 2 + 1) add up to 34. Then, we subtract
the 5 turnovers (34-5) to get 29. Finally, we divide 29 by 33 minutes played.

29/33 = 0.879

Magic’s CBE number here would be 879. This number was calculated for all
of a player’s games, and it was the average CBE that a player was asked to
improve by 1 percent over the season. Riley compared each player’s current
CBE to not only their past performances but also those of other players in the
league. As Riley put it, “We rank team members alongside league opponents
who play the same position and have similar role definitions.”

Sportswriter Jackie MacMullan noted, “Riley trumpeted the top performers in
the league in bold lettering on the blackboard each week and measured them
against the corresponding players on his own roster. Solid, reliable players
generally rated a score in the 600s, while elite players scored at least 800. Magic
Johnson, who submitted 138 triple-doubles in his career, often scored over
1,000.”

The Lakers also emphasized year-over-year progress by making historical
comparisons of CBE data. Riley said, “We stacked the month of November
1986, next to November 1985, and showed the players whether they were doing
better or worse than at the same point last season. Then we showed them how
their performance figures for December 1986, stacked up against November’s.”

The Lakers rolled out CBE in October 1986. Eight months later, they were
NBA champions. The following year, Pat Riley led his team to another title as
the Lakers became the first team in twenty years to win back-to-back NBA

championships. Afterward, he said, “Sustaining an effort is the most important
thing for any enterprise. The way to be successful is to learn how to do things
right, then do them the same way every time.”

The CBE program is a prime example of the power of reflection and review.
The Lakers were already talented. CBE helped them get the most out of what
they had, and made sure their habits improved rather than declined.

Reflection and review enables the long-term improvement of all habits
because it makes you aware of your mistakes and helps you consider possible
paths for improvement. Without reflection, we can make excuses, create
rationalizations, and lie to ourselves. We have no process for determining
whether we are performing better or worse compared to yesterday.

Top performers in all fields engage in various types of reflection and review,
and the process doesn’t have to be complex. Kenyan runner Eliud Kipchoge is
one of the greatest marathoners of all time and an Olympic gold medalist. He
still takes notes after every practice in which he reviews his training for the day
and searches for areas that can be improved. Similarly, gold medal swimmer
Katie Ledecky records her wellness on a scale of 1 to 10 and includes notes on
her nutrition and how well she slept. She also records the times posted by other
swimmers. At the end of each week, her coach goes over her notes and adds his
thoughts.

It’s not just athletes, either. When comedian Chris Rock is preparing fresh
material, he will first appear at small nightclubs dozens of times and test
hundreds of jokes. He brings a notepad on stage and records which bits go over
well and where he needs to make adjustments. The few killer lines that survive
will form the backbone of his new show.

I know of executives and investors who keep a “decision journal” in which
they record the major decisions they make each week, why they made them, and

what they expect the outcome to be. They review their choices at the end of each
month or year to see where they were correct and where they went wrong.*

Improvement is not just about learning habits, it’s also about fine-tuning them.
Reflection and review ensures that you spend your time on the right things and
make course corrections whenever necessary—like Pat Riley adjusting the effort
of his players on a nightly basis. You don’t want to keep practicing a habit if it
becomes ineffective.

Personally, I employ two primary modes of reflection and review. Each
December, I perform an Annual Review, in which I reflect on the previous year. I
tally my habits for the year by counting up how many articles I published, how
many workouts I put in, how many new places I visited, and more.* Then, I
reflect on my progress (or lack thereof) by answering three questions:

1. What went well this year?
2. What didn’t go so well this year?
3. What did I learn?

Six months later, when summer rolls around, I conduct an Integrity Report.
Like everyone, I make a lot of mistakes. My Integrity Report helps me realize
where I went wrong and motivates me to get back on course. I use it as a time to
revisit my core values and consider whether I have been living in accordance
with them. This is when I reflect on my identity and how I can work toward
being the type of person I wish to become.*

My yearly Integrity Report answers three questions:

1. What are the core values that drive my life and work?
2. How am I living and working with integrity right now?
3. How can I set a higher standard in the future?

These two reports don’t take very long—just a few hours per year—but they
are crucial periods of refinement. They prevent the gradual slide that happens
when I don’t pay close attention. They provide an annual reminder to revisit my
desired identity and consider how my habits are helping me become the type of
person I wish to be. They indicate when I should upgrade my habits and take on
new challenges and when I should dial my efforts back and focus on the
fundamentals.
Reflection can also bring a sense of perspective. Daily habits are powerful
because of how they compound, but worrying too much about every daily choice
is like looking at yourself in the mirror from an inch away. You can see every
imperfection and lose sight of the bigger picture. There is too much feedback.
Conversely, never reviewing your habits is like never looking in the mirror. You
aren’t aware of easily fixable flaws—a spot on your shirt, a bit of food in your
teeth. There is too little feedback. Periodic reflection and review is like viewing
yourself in the mirror from a conversational distance. You can see the important
changes you should make without losing sight of the bigger picture. You want to
view the entire mountain range, not obsess over each peak and valley.

Finally, reflection and review offers an ideal time to revisit one of the most
important aspects of behavior change: identity.

HOW TO BREAK THE BELIEFS THAT HOLD YOU BACK

In the beginning, repeating a habit is essential to build up evidence of your
desired identity. As you latch on to that new identity, however, those same
beliefs can hold you back from the next level of growth. When working against
you, your identity creates a kind of “pride” that encourages you to deny your
weak spots and prevents you from truly growing. This is one of the greatest
downsides of building habits.

The more sacred an idea is to us—that is, the more deeply it is tied to our
identity—the more strongly we will defend it against criticism. You see this in
every industry. The schoolteacher who ignores innovative teaching methods and
sticks with her tried-and-true lesson plans. The veteran manager who is
committed to doing things “his way.” The surgeon who dismisses the ideas of
her younger colleagues. The band who produces a mind-blowing first album and
then gets stuck in a rut. The tighter we cling to an identity, the harder it becomes
to grow beyond it.

One solution is to avoid making any single aspect of your identity an
overwhelming portion of who you are. In the words of investor Paul Graham,
“keep your identity small.” The more you let a single belief define you, the less
capable you are of adapting when life challenges you. If you tie everything up in
being the point guard or the partner at the firm or whatever else, then the loss of
that facet of your life will wreck you. If you’re a vegan and then develop a
health condition that forces you to change your diet, you’ll have an identity crisis
on your hands. When you cling too tightly to one identity, you become brittle.
Lose that one thing and you lose yourself.
For most of my young life, being an athlete was a major part of my identity.
After my baseball career ended, I struggled to find myself. When you spend your
whole life defining yourself in one way and that disappears, who are you now?

Military veterans and former entrepreneurs report similar feelings. If your
identity is wrapped up in a belief like “I’m a great soldier,” what happens when
your period of service ends? For many business owners, their identity is
something along the lines of “I’m the CEO” or “I’m the founder.” If you have
spent every waking moment working on your business, how will you feel after
you sell the company?

The key to mitigating these losses of identity is to redefine yourself such that
you get to keep important aspects of your identity even if your particular role
changes.

° “T’m an athlete” becomes “I’m the type of person who is mentally
tough and loves a physical challenge.”

° “T’m a great soldier” transforms into “I’m the type of person who is
disciplined, reliable, and great on a team.”

° “T’m the CEO” translates to “I’m the type of person who builds and

creates things.”

When chosen effectively, an identity can be flexible rather than brittle. Like
water flowing around an obstacle, your identity works with the changing
circumstances rather than against them.

The following quote from the Tao Te Ching encapsulates the ideas perfectly:

Men are born soft and supple;
dead, they are stiff and hard.
Plants are born tender and pliant;
dead, they are brittle and dry.
Thus whoever is stiff and inflexible
is a disciple of death.
Whoever is soft and yielding
is a disciple of life.

The hard and stiff will be broken.
The soft and supple will prevail.
—Lno Tw

Habits deliver numerous benefits, but the downside is that they can lock us
into our previous patterns of thinking and acting—even when the world is
shifting around us. Everything is impermanent. Life is constantly changing, so
you need to periodically check in to see if your old habits and beliefs are still
serving you.
Chapter Summary

Conclusion

The Secret to Results That Last

"Doreesas ancient Greek parable known as the Sorites Paradox,* which talks about

the effect one small action can have when repeated enough times. One
formulation of the paradox goes as follows: Can one coin make a person rich? If
you give a person a pile of ten coins, you wouldn’t claim that he or she is rich.
But what if you add another? And another? And another? At some point, you
will have to admit that no one can be rich unless one coin can make him or her
sO.

We can say the same about atomic habits. Can one tiny change transform your
life? It’s unlikely you would say so. But what if you made another? And
another? And another? At some point, you will have to admit that your life was
transformed by one small change.

The holy grail of habit change is not a single 1 percent improvement, but a
thousand of them. It’s a bunch of atomic habits stacking up, each one a
fundamental unit of the overall system.

In the beginning, small improvements can often seem meaningless because
they get washed away by the weight of the system. Just as one coin won’t make
you rich, one positive change like meditating for one minute or reading one page
each day is unlikely to deliver a noticeable difference.

Gradually, though, as you continue to layer small changes on top of one
another, the scales of life start to move. Each improvement is like adding a grain
of sand to the positive side of the scale, slowly tilting things in your favor.
Eventually, if you stick with it, you hit a tipping point. Suddenly, it feels easier
to stick with good habits. The weight of the system is working for you rather
than against you.

Over the course of this book, we’ve looked at dozens of stories about top
performers. We’ve heard about Olympic gold medalists, award-winning artists,
business leaders, lifesaving physicians, and star comedians who have all used the
science of small habits to master their craft and vault to the top of their field.
Each of the people, teams, and companies we have covered has faced different
circumstances, but ultimately progressed in the same way: through a
commitment to tiny, sustainable, unrelenting improvements.
Success is not a goal to reach or a finish line to cross. It is a system to
improve, an endless process to refine. In Chapter 1, I said, “If you’re having
trouble changing your habits, the problem isn’t you. The problem is your system.
Bad habits repeat themselves again and again not because you don’t want to
change, but because you have the wrong system for change.”

As this book draws to a close, I hope the opposite is true. With the Four Laws
of Behavior Change, you have a set of tools and strategies that you can use to
build better systems and shape better habits. Sometimes a habit will be hard to
remember and you’ll need to make it obvious. Other times you won’t feel like
starting and you’ll need to make it attractive. In many cases, you may find that a
habit will be too difficult and you’ll need to make it easy. And sometimes, you
won’t feel like sticking with it and you’ll need to make it satisfying.

Behaviors are effortless here. Behaviors are difficult here.

Obvious Invisible

Attractive Unattractive

Easy Hard

Satisfying Unsatisfying

You want to push your good habits toward the left side of the spectrum by making them obvious, attractive, easy, and satisfying, Meanwhile, you want to cluster your bad habits toward the
right side by making them invisible, unattractive, hard, and unsatisfying,

This is a continuous process. There is no finish line. There is no permanent
solution. Whenever you’re looking to improve, you can rotate through the Four
Laws of Behavior Change until you find the next bottleneck. Make it obvious.
Make it attractive. Make it easy. Make it satisfying. Round and round. Always
looking for the next way to get 1 percent better.

The secret to getting results that last is to never stop making improvements.
It’s remarkable what you can build if you just don’t stop. It’s remarkable the
business you can build if you don’t stop working. It’s remarkable the body you
can build if you don’t stop training. It’s remarkable the knowledge you can build
if you don’t stop learning. It’s remarkable the fortune you can build if you don’t
stop saving. It’s remarkable the friendships you can build if you don’t stop
caring. Small habits don’t add up. They compound.

That’s the power of atomic habits. Tiny changes. Remarkable results.
Appendix
What Should You Read Next?

Tow vou so Much for taking the time to read this book. It has been a pleasure

sharing my work with you. If you are looking for something to read next, allow
me to offer a suggestion.

If you enjoyed Atomic Habits, then you may like my other writing as well. My
latest articles are sent out in my free weekly newsletter. Subscribers are also the
first to hear about my newest books and projects. Finally, in addition to my own
work, each year I send out a reading list of my favorite books from other authors
on a wide range of subjects.

You can sign up at:

jamesclear.com/newsletter
Little Lessons from the Four Laws

| soox, I have introduced a four-step model for human behavior: cue, craving,

response, reward. This framework not only teaches us how to create new habits
but also reveals some interesting insights about human behavior.

Problem phase|

1. Cue
2. Craving

Solution phase

3, Response
4, Reward

In this section, I have compiled some lessons (and a few bits of common
sense) that are confirmed by the model. The purpose of these examples is to
clarify just how useful and wide-ranging this framework is when describing
human behavior. Once you understand the model, you’ll see examples of it
everywhere.

Awareness comes before desire. A craving is created when you assign
meaning to a cue. Your brain constructs an emotion or feeling to describe your
current situation, and that means a craving can only occur after you have noticed
an opportunity.

Happiness is simply the absence of desire. When you observe a cue, but do
not desire to change your state, you are content with the current situation.
Happiness is not about the achievement of pleasure (which is joy or satisfaction),
but about the lack of desire. It arrives when you have no urge to feel differently.
Happiness is the state you enter when you no longer want to change your state.

However, happiness is fleeting because a new desire always comes along. As
Caed Budris says, “Happiness is the space between one desire being fulfilled and
a new desire forming.” Likewise, suffering is the space between craving a
change in state and getting it.

It is the idea of pleasure that we chase. We seek the image of pleasure that
we generate in our minds. At the time of action, we do not know what it will be
like to attain that image (or even if it will satisfy us). The feeling of satisfaction
only comes afterward. This is what the Austrian neurologist Victor Frankl meant
when he said that happiness cannot be pursued, it must ensue. Desire is pursued.
Pleasure ensues from action.

Peace occurs when you don’t turn your observations into problems. The
first step in any behavior is observation. You notice a cue, a bit of information,
an event. If you do not desire to act on what you observe, then you are at peace.

Craving is about wanting to fix everything. Observation without craving is the
realization that you do not need to fix anything. Your desires are not running
rampant. You do not crave a change in state. Your mind does not generate a
problem for you to solve. You’re simply observing and existing.

With a big enough why you can overcome any how. Friedrich Nietzsche,
the German philosopher and poet, famously wrote, “He who has a why to live
for can bear almost any how.” This phrase harbors an important truth about
human behavior. If your motivation and desire are great enough (that is, why are
you are acting), you’ll take action even when it is quite difficult. Great craving
can power great action—even when friction is high.

Being curious is better than being smart. Being motivated and curious
counts for more than being smart because it leads to action. Being smart will
never deliver results on its own because it doesn’t get you to act. It is desire, not
intelligence, that prompts behavior. As Naval Ravikant says, “The trick to doing
anything is first cultivating a desire for it.”

Emotions drive behavior. Every decision is an emotional decision at some
level. Whatever your logical reasons are for taking action, you only feel
compelled to act on them because of emotion. In fact, people with damage to
emotional centers of the brain can list many reasons for taking action but still
will not act because they do not have emotions to drive them. This is why
craving comes before response. The feeling comes first, and then the behavior.

We can only be rational and logical after we have been emotional. The
primary mode of the brain is to feel; the secondary mode is to think. Our first
response—the fast, nonconscious portion of the brain—is optimized for feeling
and anticipating. Our second response—the slow, conscious portion of the brain
—is the part that does the “thinking.”

Psychologists refer to this as System 1 (feelings and rapid judgments) versus
System 2 (rational analysis). The feeling comes first (System 1); the rationality
only intervenes later (System 2). This works great when the two are aligned, but
it results in illogical and emotional thinking when they are not.

Your response tends to follow your emotions. Our thoughts and actions are
rooted in what we find attractive, not necessarily in what is logical. Two people
can notice the same set of facts and respond very differently because they run
those facts through their unique emotional filter. This is one reason why
appealing to emotion is typically more powerful than appealing to reason. If a
topic makes someone feel emotional, they will rarely be interested in the data.
This is why emotions can be such a threat to wise decision making.

Put another way: most people believe that the reasonable response is the one
that benefits them: the one that satisfies their desires. To approach a situation
from a more neutral emotional position allows you to base your response on the
data rather than the emotion.

Suffering drives progress. The source of all suffering is the desire for a
change in state. This is also the source of all progress. The desire to change your
state is what powers you to take action. It is wanting more that pushes humanity
to seek improvements, develop new technologies, and reach for a higher level.
With craving, we are dissatisfied but driven. Without craving, we are satisfied
but lack ambition.

Your actions reveal how badly you want something. If you keep saying
something is a priority but you never act on it, then you don’t really want it. It’s
time to have an honest conversation with yourself. Your actions reveal your true
motivations.

Reward is on the other side of sacrifice. Response (sacrifice of energy)
always precedes reward (the collection of resources). The “runner’s high” only
comes after the hard run. The reward only comes after the energy is spent.

Self-control is difficult because it is not satisfying. A reward is an outcome
that satisfies your craving. This makes self-control ineffective because inhibiting
our desires does not usually resolve them. Resisting temptation does not satisfy
your craving; it just ignores it. It creates space for the craving to pass. Self-
control requires you to release a desire rather than satisfy it.

Our expectations determine our satisfaction. The gap between our cravings
and our rewards determines how satisfied we feel after taking action. If the
mismatch between expectations and outcomes is positive (surprise and delight),
then we are more likely to repeat a behavior in the future. If the mismatch is
negative (disappointment and frustration), then we are less likely to do so.

For example, if you expect to get $10 and get $100, you feel great. If you
expect to get $100 and get $10, you feel disappointed. Your expectation changes
your satisfaction. An average experience preceded by high expectations is a
disappointment. An average experience preceded by low expectations is a
delight. When liking and wanting are approximately the same, you feel satisfied.

Oat fat oT ttt WaT__at
Sausraction = Liking — wanting

This is the wisdom behind Seneca’s famous quote, “Being poor is not having
too little, it is wanting more.” If your wants outpace your likes, you’ll always be
unsatisfied. You’re perpetually putting more weight on the problem than the
solution.

Happiness is relative. When I first began sharing my writing publicly it took
me three months to get one thousand subscribers. When I hit that milestone, I
told my parents and my girlfriend. We celebrated. I felt excited and motivated. A
few years later, I realized that one thousand people were signing up each day.
And yet I didn’t even think to tell anyone. It felt normal. I was getting results
ninety times faster than before but experiencing little pleasure over it. It wasn’t
until a few days later that I realized how absurd it was that I wasn’t celebrating
something that would have seemed like a pipe dream just a few years before.

The pain of failure correlates to the height of expectation. When desire is
high, it hurts to not like the outcome. Failing to attain something you want hurts
more than failing to attain something you didn’t think much about in the first
place. This is why people say, “I don’t want to get my hopes up.”

Feelings come both before and after the behavior. Before acting, there is a
feeling that motivates you to act—the craving. After acting, there is a feeling
that teaches you to repeat the action in the future—the reward.

Cue > Craving (Feeling) > Response > Reward (Feeling)

How we feel influences how we act, and how we act influences how we feel.

Desire initiates. Pleasure sustains. Wanting and liking are the two drivers of
behavior. If it’s not desirable, you have no reason to do it. Desire and craving are
what initiate a behavior. But if it’s not enjoyable, you have no reason to repeat it.
Pleasure and satisfaction are what sustain a behavior. Feeling motivated gets you
to act. Feeling successful gets you to repeat.

Hope declines with experience and is replaced by acceptance. The first
time an opportunity arises, there is hope of what could be. Your expectation
(cravings) is based solely on promise. The second time around, your expectation
is grounded in reality. You begin to understand how the process works and your
hope is gradually traded for a more accurate prediction and acceptance of the
likely outcome.

This is one reason why we continually grasp for the latest get-rich-quick or
weight-loss scheme. New plans offer hope because we don’t have any
experiences to ground our expectations. New strategies seem more appealing
than old ones because they can have unbounded hope. As Aristotle noted,
“Youth is easily deceived because it is quick to hope.” Perhaps this can be
revised to “Youth is easily deceived because it only hopes.” There is no
experience to root the expectation in. In the beginning, hope is all you have.
How to Apply These Ideas to Business

O... tue vears, 1’ve Spoken at Fortune 500 companies and growing start-ups about

how to apply the science of small habits to run more effective businesses and
build better products. I’ve compiled many of the most practical strategies into a
short bonus chapter. I think you’ll find it to be an incredibly useful addition to
the main ideas mentioned in Atomic Habits.

You can download this chapter at: atomichabits.com/business
How to Apply These Ideas to Parenting

O. or me Most common questions I hear from readers is something along the
lines of, “How can I get my kids to do this stuff?” The ideas in Atomic Habits
are intended to apply broadly to all of human behavior (teenagers are humans,
too), which means you should find plenty of useful strategies in the main text.
That said, parenting does face its own set of challenges. As a bonus chapter, I’ve
put together a brief guide on how to apply these ideas specifically to parenting.

You can download this chapter at: atomichabits.com/parenting
Acknowledgments

I nave rewitd Heavy ON. Others during the creation of this book. Before anyone else, I

must thank my wife, Kristy, who has been indispensable throughout this process.
She has played every role a person can play in the writing of a book: spouse,
friend, fan, critic, editor, researcher, therapist. It is no exaggeration to say this
book would not be the same without her. It might not exist at all. Like
everything in our life, we did it together.

Second, I am grateful to my family, not only for their support and
encouragement on this book but also for believing in me no matter what project I
happen to be working on. I have benefited from many years of support from my
parents, grandparents, and siblings. In particular, I want my mom and dad to
know that I love them. It is a special feeling to know that your parents are your
greatest fans.

Third, to my assistant, Lyndsey Nuckols. At this point, her job defies
description as she has been asked to do nearly everything one could imagine for
a small business. Thankfully, her skills and talents are more powerful than my
questionable management style. Some sections of this book are as much hers as
they are mine. I am deeply grateful for her help.

As for the content and writing of the book, I have a long list of people to
thank. To start, there are a few people from whom I have learned so much that it
would be a crime to not mention them by name. Leo Babauta, Charles Duhigg,
Nir Eyal, and BJ Fogg have each influenced my thoughts on habits in
meaningful ways. Their work and ideas can be found sprinkled throughout this
text. If you enjoyed this book, I’d encourage you to read their writing as well.

At various stages of writing, I benefited from the guidance of many fine
editors. Thanks to Peter Guzzardi for walking me through the early stages of the
writing process and for a kick in the pants when I really needed it. I am indebted
to Blake Atwood and Robin Dellabough for transforming my ugly and insanely
long first drafts into a tight, readable manuscript. And I am thankful to Anne
Barngrover for her ability to add a little class and poetic style to my writing.

I’d like to thank the many people who read early versions of the manuscript,
including Bruce Ammons, Darcey Ansell, Tim Ballard, Vishal Bhardwaj,
Charlotte Blank, Jerome Burt, Sim Campbell, Al Carlos, Nicky Case, Julie
Chang, Jason Collins, Debra Croy, Roger Dooley, Tiago Forte, Matt Gartland,
Andrew Gierer, Randy Giffen, Jon Giganti, Adam Gilbert, Stephan Guyenet,
Jeremy Hendon, Jane Horvath, Joakim Jansson, Josh Kaufman, Anne Kavanagh,
Chris Klaus, Zeke Lopez, Cady Macon, Cyd Madsen, Kiera McGrath, Amy
Mitchell, Anna Moise, Stacey Morris, Tara-Nicholle Nelson, Taylor Pearson,
Max Shank, Trey Shelton, Jason Shen, Jacob Zangelidis, and Ari Zelmanow.
The book benefited greatly from your feedback.

To the team at Avery and Penguin Random House who made this book a
reality, thank you. I owe a debt of special thanks to my publisher, Megan
Newman, for her endless patience as I continually pushed back deadlines. She
gave me the space I needed to create a book I was proud of and championed my
ideas at every step. To Nina, for her ability to transform my writing while still
retaining my original message. To Lindsay, Farin, Casey, and the rest of the
PRH team for spreading the message of this book to more people than I could
ever reach on my own. To Pete Garceau, for designing a beautiful cover for this
book.

And to my agent, Lisa DiMona, for her guidance and insight at every step of
the publishing process.

To the many friends and family members who asked “How’s the book
going?” and offered a word of encouragement when I inevitably replied
“Slowly”—thank you. Every author faces a few dark moments when writing a
book, and one kind word can be enough to get you to show up again the next
day.

I am sure there are people I have forgotten, but I keep an updated list of
anyone who has influenced my thinking in meaningful ways at
jamesclear.com/thanks.

And finally, to you. Life is short and you have shared some of your precious
time with me by reading this book. Thank you.

—May 2018
Notes

I. tus secon, | have included a detailed list of notes, references, and citations for

each chapter in the book. I trust that most readers will find this list to be
sufficient. However, I also realize that scientific literature changes over time and
the references for this book may need to be updated. Furthermore, I fully expect
that I have made a mistake somewhere in this book—either in attributing an idea
to the wrong person or not giving credit to someone where it is due. (If you
believe this to be the case, please email me at james@jamesclear.com so I can
fix the issue as soon as possible.)

In addition to the notes below, you can find a full list of updated endnotes and
corrections at atomichabits.com/endnotes.
INTRODUCTION

We all deal with setbacks: What about luck, you might ask? Luck matters, certainly, Habits are not the only thing that influence your success, but they are probably the most important factor that is
within your control. And the only selfimprovement strategy that makes any sense is to focus on what you can control,

The entrepreneur and investor Naval_Ravikant: Naval Ravikant (@naval), “To write a great book, you must first become the book,” Twitter, May 15, 2018,
hhtips://twitter.com/naval/status/996460948029362176.

“stimulus, response, reward”: B. F. Skinner, The Behavior of Organisms (New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1938).

“cue, routine, reward”: Charles Duhigg, The Power of Habit: Why We Do What We Do in Life and Business (New York: Random House, 2014).

CHAPTER 1

just__a__ single gold _medal__at__the Olympic Games: Matt Slater, “How GB Cycling Went from Tragic to Magic,” BBC Sport, April 14, 2008,
http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport2/hi/olympics/cycling/7534073.stm.

the Tour de France: Tom Fordyce, “Tour de France 2017: Is Chris Froome Britain’s Least Loved Great Sportsman?” BBC Sport, July 23, 2017, https://www.bbc.com/sport/cycling/40692045.

one of the top bike manufacturers in Europe refused to sell bikes: Richard Moore, Mastermind: How Dave Brailsford Reinvented the Wheel (Glasgow: BackPage Press, 2013).

“The whole principle came from the idea”: Matt Slater, “Olympics Cycling: Marginal Gains Underpin Team GB Dominance,” BBC, August 8, 2012, https://www.bbc.com/sport/olympics/19174302.

Brailsford and his coaches began by making small adjustments: Tim Harford, “Marginal Gains Matter but Gamechangers Transform,” Tim Harford, April 2017,
hhtip://timharford.com/2017/04/marginal-gains-matter-but-gamechangers-transform,

they even painted the inside of the team truck white: Eben Harrell, “How 1% Performance Improvements Led to Olympic Gold,” Harvard Business Review, October 30, 2015,
hhtips://hbr.org/2015/10/how-1-performance-improvements-led-to-olympic-gold; Kevin Clark, “How a Cycling Team Turmed the Falcons Into NEC Champions,” The Ringer, September 12,
2017, hups://www theringer.com/nfl/2017/9/12/162932.16/atlanta-falcons-thomas-dimitroff-cyclingteam-sky.

Just five years after Brailsford took over: Technically, the British riders won 57 percent of the road and track cycling medals at the 2008 Olympics. Fourteen gold medals were available in road and

track cycling events. The Brits won eight of them.

raised the bar: “World and Olympic_—-Records._-« Set_ «= at_—sthe.~=—«2012-~ Summer _—Olympics,”. Wikipedia, December 8, -—2017,
htips://en. wikipedia.org/wiki/World_and_Olympic_records_set_at_the_2012_Summer_Olympics!

Bradley Wiggins became the first British cyclist: Andrew Longmore, “Bradley Wiggins,” Encyclopaedia Britannica, https://www.britannica,com/biography/Bradley-Wiggins, last modified April 21,
2018,

Chris Froome won: Karen Sparks, “Chris Froome,” Encyclopaedia Britannica, https://www.britannica.com/biography/Chris-Froome, last modified October 23, 2017,

During the ten-year span from 2007 to 2017: “Medals won by the Great Britain Cycling Team at world championships, Olympic Games and Paralympic Games since 2000,” British Cycling,
https://www.britishcycling.org.uk/gbcyclingteam/article/Gbrst_gb-cyclingteam-GBCycling-Team-Medal-History—0?c=EN#K0dW APjq84CV8Wzw.99, accessed June 8, 2018.

you'll end up thirty-seven times better: Jason Shen, an entrepreneur and writer, received an early look at this book. After reading this chapter, he remarked: “If the gains were linear, you'd predict to be
3.65x better off. But because it is exponential, the improvement is actually 10x greater.” April 3, 2018.

Habits are the compound interest: Many people have noted how habits multiply over time. Here are some of my favorite articles and books on the subject: Leo Babauta, “The Power of Habit
Investments,” Zen Habits, January 28, 2013, https://zenhabits.nev/bank; Morgan Housel, “The Freakishly Strong Base,” Collaborative Fund, October 31, 2017,
http://vww.collaborativefund.com/blog/the-freakishly-strong-base; Darren Hardy, The Compound Effect (New York: Vanguard Press, 2012).

Accomplishing one extra task: As Sam Altman says, “A small productivity gain, compounded over 50 years, is worth a lot.” “Productivity,” Sam Altman. April 10, 2018,
hhtip://blog.samaltman.com/productivit

Habits are a double-edged sword: I'd like to credit Jason Hreha with originally describing habits to me in this way. Jason Hreha (@jhreha), “They're a double edged sword,” Twitter, February 21,
2018, https://twitter. com/jhreha/status/96643090737 1433984.

‘The more tasks you can handle without thinking: Michael (@mmay3r), “The foundation of productivity is habits. The more you do automatically, the more you’re subsequently freed to do. This effect
compounds,” Twitter, April 10, 2018, hteps://twitter.com/mmay3r/status/983837519274889216,

each book you read not only teaches: This idea—that learning new ideas increases the value of your old ideas—is something I first heard about from Patrick O’ Shaughnessy, who writes, “This is why
knowledge compounds. Old stuff that was a 4/10 in value can become a 10/10, unlocked by another book in the future.” http://investorfieldguide.com/reading-tweet-storm.

Cancer spends 80 percent of its life undetectable: “How to Live a Longer, Higher Quality Life, with Peter Attia, M.D.,” Investor’s Field Guide, March 7, 2017, htip://investorfieldguide.convattia,

‘The San Antonio Spurs: Matt Moore, “NBA Finals: A Rock, Hammer and Cracking of Spurs’ Majesty in Game 7,” CBS Sports, June 21, 2013, https://www.cbssports.com/nba/news/nba-finals-a-rock-
hammer-and-cracking-of-spurs-majesty-in-game-7,

Inspiration for this drawing came from a tweet titled “Deception of linear vs exponential” by @MlichaelW. May 19, 2018. https://twitter.com/MlichaelW/status/997878086132817920.

The seed of every habit: This paragraph was inspired by a quote from Mr. Mircea, an account on Twitter, who wrote, “each habit began its life as a single decision.” htips://twitter,com/mistermircea,

the goal cannot be what differentiates the winners from the losers: Hat tip to CrossFit coach Ben Bergeron for inspiring this quote during a conversation I had with him on February 28, 2017.

You fall to the level of your systems: This line was inspired by the following quote from Archilochus: “We don’t rise to the level of our expectations, we fall to the level of our training.”

the Bi

CHAPTER 2

‘You can imagine them like the layers of an onion: Hat tip to Simon Sinek. His “Golden Circle” framework is similar in design, but discusses different topics. For more, see Simon Sinek, Start with
Why: How Great Leaders Inspire Everyone to Take Action (London: Portfolio/Penguin, 2013), 37.

I resolved to stop chewing my nails: The quotes used in this section are presented as a conversation for reading clarity, but were originally written by Clark. See: Brian Clark, “The Powerful
Psychological Boost that Helps You Make and Break Habits,” Further, November 14, 2017, https://further.net/pride-hab

Research has shown that once a person: Christopher J. Bryan et al., “Motivating Voter Turnout by Invoking the Self,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108, no. 31 (2011): 12653-
12656.

‘There is internal pressure: Leon Festinger, A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1957).

Your identity is literally your “repeated beingness”: Technically, identidem is a word belonging to the Late Latin language. Also, thanks to Tamar Shippony, a reader of jamesclear.com, who
originally told me about the etymology of the word identity, which she looked up in the American Heritage Dictionary.

We change bit by bit: This is another reason atomic habits are such an effective form of change. If you change your identity too quickly and become someone radically different overnight, then you feel
as if you lose your sense of self. But if you update and expand your identity gradually, you will find yourself reborn into someone totally new and yet still familiar, Slowly—habit by habit,
vote by vote—you become accustomed to your new identity. Atomic habits and gradual improvement are the keys to identity change without identity loss.

CHAPTER 3

Edward Thorndike conducted an experiment: Peter Gray, Psychology, 6th ed. (New York: Worth, 2011), 108-109.

“by some simple act, such as pulling at a loop of cord”: Edward L. Thorndike, “Animal Intelligence: An Experimental Study of the Associative Processes in Animals,” Psychological Review:
‘Monograph Supplements 2, no. 4 (1898), doi:10.1037/h0092987.

“behaviors followed by satisfying consequences”: This is an abbreviated version of the original quote from Thomdike, which reads: “responses that produce a satisfying effect in a particular situation
become more likely to occur again in that situation, and responses that produce a discomforting effect become less likely to occur again in that situation.” For more, see Peter Gray,
Psychology, 6th ed. (New York: Worth, 2011), 108-109.

Neurological activity in the brain is high: Charles Duhigg, The Power of Habit; Why We Do What We Do in Life and Business (New York: Random House, 2014), 15; Ann M. Graybiel, “Network-
Level Neuroplasticity in Cortico-Basal Ganglia Pathways,” Parkinsonism and Related Disorders 10, no. 5 (2004), doi:10.1016/.parkreldis.2004.03,007.

“Habits are, simply, reliable solutions”: Jason Hreha, “Why Our Conscious Minds Are Suckers for Novelty,” Revue, https://www.getrevue.co/profile/jason/issues/why-our-conscious-minds-are-

jovelty-54131, accessed June 8, 2018,

John R. Anderson, “Acquisition of Cognitive Skill,” Psychological Review 89, no. 4 (1982), doi:10.1037/0033-295X.89.4.369.

the brain remembers the past: Shahram Heshmat, “Why Do We Remember Certain Things, But Forget Others,” Psychology Today, October 8, 2015,
hhtips://www. psychologytoday.com/us/blog/science-choice/201510/why-do-we-remember-certain-things-forget-others.

the conscious mind is the bottleneck: William H. Gladstones, Michael A. Regan, and Robert B. Lee, “Division of Attention: The Single-Channel Hypothesis Revisited,” Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology Section A 41, no. 1 (1989), doi:10,1080/14640748908402350.

the conscious mind likes to pawn off tasks: Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2015).

Habits reduce cognitive load: John R. Anderson, “Acquisition of Cognitive Skill,” Psychological Review 89, no. 4 (1982), doi:10,1037/0033-295 X.89.4,369,

Feelings of pleasure and disappointment: Antonio R. Damasio, The Strange Order of Things: Life, Feeling, and the Making of Cultures (New York: Pantheon Books, 2018); Lisa Feldman Barrett,
How Emotions Are Made (London: Pan Books, 2018).

CHAPTER 4

The psychologist Gary Klein: I originally heard about this story from Daniel Kahneman, but it was confirmed by Gary Klein in an email on March 30, 2017. Klein also covers the story in his own book,
which uses slightly different quotes: Gary A. Klein, Sources of Power: How People Make Decisions (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998), 43-44.

military analysts can identify which blip on a radar screen: Gary A. Klein, Sources of Power: How People Make Decisions (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998), 38-40.

‘Museum curators have been known to discern: The story of the Getty kouros, covered in Malcolm Gladwell’s book Blink, is a famous example. The sculpture, initially believed to be from ancient
Greece, was purchased for $10 million. ‘The controversy surrounding the sculpture happened later when one expert identified it as a forgery upon first glance.

Experienced radiologists can look at a brain scan: Siddhartha Mukherjee, “The Algorithm Will See You Now,” New Yorker, April 3, 2017, hups://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2017/04/03/ai-
versus-md,

‘The human brain is a prediction machine: The German physician Hermann von Helmholtz, developed the idea of the brain being a “prediction machine.”

the clerk swiped the customer’s actual credit card: Helix van Boron, “What’s the Dumbest Thing You’ve Done While Your Brain Is on Autopilot,” Reddit, August 21, 2017,
https://www reddit.com/t/AskReddit/comments/6v1t91/whats_the_dumbest_thing_youve_done_while_your/dlxa5y9.

she kept asking coworkers if they had washed their hands: SwordOfTheLlama, “What Strange Habits Have You Picked Up from Your Line of Work,” Reddit, January 4, 2016,
https://www-reddit, com/t/AskReddit/comments/3zckq6/what_strange_habits_have_you_picked_up_from_your/cyl3nta,

story of a man who had spent years working as a lifeguard: SwearlmaChick, “What Strange Habits Have You Picked Up from Your Line of Work,” Reddit, January 4, 2016,
https://www.reddit, com/r/AskReddit/comments/3zckq6/what_strange_habits_have_you_picked_up_from_your/cyl681q.

“Until you make the unconscious conscious”: Although this quote by Jung is popular, I had trouble tracking down the original source. It’s probably a paraphrase of this passage: “The psychological
tule says that when an inner situation is not made conscious, it happens outside, as fate. ‘That is to say, when the individual remains undivided and does not become conscious of his inner
opposite, the world must perforce act out the conflict and be torn into opposing halves.” For more, see C. G. Jung, Aion: Researches into the Phenomenology of the Self (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1959), 71.

Pointing-and-Calling reduces errors: Alice Gordenker, “JR Gestures,” Japan Times, October 21, 2008, https://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2008/10/21/reference/jr-gestures/#,WvIG49Mvzu1,

The MTA subway system in New York City: Allan Richarz, “Why Japan’s Rail Workers Can’t Stop Pointing at Things,” Atlas Obscura, March 29, 2017,
https://www.atlasobscura,com/articles/pointing-and-calling-japan-trains.

CHAPTER 5

researchers in Great Britain began working: Sarah Milne, Sheina Orbell, and Paschal Sheeran, “Combining Motivational and Volitional Interventions to Promote Exercise Participation: Protection
Motivation Theory and Implementation Intentions,” British Journal of Health Psychology 7 (May 2002): 163-184,

implementation intentions are effective: Peter Gollwitzer and Paschal Sheeran, “Implementation Intentions and Goal Achievement: A Meta-Analysis of Effects and Processes,” Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology 38 (2006): 69-119.

writing down the exact time and date of when you will get a flu shot: Katherine L. Milkman, John Beshears, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C, Madrian, “Using Implementation Intentions
Prompts to Enhance Influenza Vaccination Rates,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108, no. 26 (June 2011): 10415-10420.

recording the time of your colonoscopy appointment: Katherine L. Milkman, John Beshears, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian, “Planning Prompts as a Means of Increasing
Preventive Screening Rates,” Preventive Medicine 56, no. 1 (January 2013): 92-93.

avid W. Nickerson and Todd Rogers, “Do You Have a Voting Plan? Implementation Intentions, Voter Turnout, and Organic Plan Making,” Psychological Science 21, no. 2
(2010); 194-199.

Other successful government programs: “Policymakers around the World Are Embracing Behavioural Science,” The Economist, May 18, 2017,
htips://www.economist.com/news/international/21722163-experimental-iterative-data-driven-approach-gaining-ground-policymakers-around,

people who make a specific plan for when and where: Edwin Locke and Gary Latham, “Building a Practically Useful Theory of Goal Setting and Task Motivation: A 35-Year Odyssey,” American
Psychologist 57, no. 9 (2002): 705-717, doi:10.1037//0003-066x.57.9.705,

hope is usually higher: Hengchen Dai, Katherine L. Milkman, and Jason Riis, “The Fresh Start Effect: Temporal Landmarks Motivate Aspirational Behavior,” PsycEXTRA Dataset, 2014,
doi: 10.1037/e513702014—-058.

writer Jason Zweig noted: Jason Zweig, “Elevate Your Financial IQ: A Value Packed Discussion with Jason Zweig,” interview by Shane Parrish, The Knowledge Project, Farnam Street, audio,
https://www. fs, blog/2015/10/jason-zweig-knowledge-project.

many ways to use implementation intentions: For the term habit stacking, 1 am indebted to S. J. Scott, who wrote a book by the same name. From what I understand, his concept is slightly different,
but I like the term and thought it appropriate to use in this chapter. Previous writers such as Courtney Carver and Julien Smith have also used the term habit stacking, but in different
contexts.

The French philosopher Denis Diderot: “Denis Diderot,” New World Encyclopedia, http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Denis_Diderot, last modified October 26, 2017.

acquired a scarlet robe: Encyclopedia Britannica, vol. 8 (1911), s.v. “Denis Diderot.” Diderot’s scarlet robe is frequently described as a gift from a friend. However, | could find no original source

claiming it was a gift nor any mention of the friend who supplied the robe. If you happen to know any historians specializing in robe acquisitions, feel free to point them my way so we can
clarify the mystery of the source of Diderot’s famous scarlet rabe.

“no__more coordination, _no__more _unity, no _more beauty”: Denis Diderot, “Regrets. for My Old Dressing Gown,” trans. Mitchell Abidor, 2005,
htips://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/diderov/1769/regrets.htm.

The Diderot Effect states: Juliet Schor, The Overspent American: Why We Want What We Don’t Need (New York: HarperPerennial, 1999).

which was created by BJ Fogg: In this chapter, I used the term habit stacking to refer to linking a new habit to an old one, For this idea, I give credit to BJ Fogg. In his work, Fogg uses the term
anchoring to describe this approach because your old habit acts as an “anchor” that keeps the new one in place. No matter what term you prefer, | believe it is a very effective strategy. You
can learn more about Fogg’s work and his Tiny Habits Method at https://www.tinyhabits.com.

“One in, one out”: Dev Basu (@devbasu), “Have a one-in-one-out policy when buying things,” Twitter, February 11, 2018, https://twitter.com/devbasw/status/962778141965000704,

CHAPTER 6

Anne Thorndike: Anne N. Thorndike et al., “A 2-Phase Labeling and Choice Architecture Intervention to Improve Healthy Food and Beverage Choices,” American Journal of Public Health 102, no. 3
(2012), doi:10.2105/ajph.2011,300391

choose products not because of what they are: Multiple research studies have shown that the mere sight of food can make us feel hungry even when we don’t have actual physiological hunger.
‘According to one researcher, “dietary behaviors are, in large part, the consequence of automatic responses to contextual food cues.” For more, see D. A. Cohen and S. H. Babey,
“Contextual Influences on Eating Behaviours: Heuristic Processing and Dietary Choices,” Obesity Reviews 13, no. 9 (2012), doiz10.1111/j.1467-789x.2012.01001.x; and Andrew J. Hill,
Lynn D. Magson, and John E, Blundell, “Hunger and Palatability: Tracking Ratings of Subjective Experience Before, during and after the Consumption of Preferred and Less Preferred
Food,” Appetite 5, no. 4 (1984), doi:10.1016/s0195-6663(84)80008-2.

Behavior is a function of the Person in their Environment: Kurt Lewin, Principles of Topological Psychology (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1936).

Suggestion Impulse Buying: Hawkins Stern, “The Significance of Impulse Buying Today,” Journal of Marketing 26, no. 2 (1962), doi:10.2307/1248439.

45 percent of Coca-Cola sales: Michael Moss, “Nudged to the Produce Aisle by a Look in the Mirror,” New York Times, August 27, 2013, hups://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/28/dining/wooing-us-
down-the-produce-aisle.htm!?_r=0,

People drink Bud Light because: The more exposure people have to food, the more likely they are to purchase it and eat it, T. Burgoine et al., “Associations between Exposure to Takeaway Food
Outlets, Takeaway Food Consumption, and Body Weight in Cambridgeshire, UK: Population Based, Cross Sectional Study,” British Medical Journal 348, no, 5 (2014),
doi:10,1136/bmj.g1464,

The human body has about eleven million sensory receptors: Timothy D. Wilson, Strangers to Ourselves: Discovering the Adaptive Unconscious (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 2004), 24,

half of the brain’s resources are used on vision: B. R. Sheth et al., “Orientation Maps of Subjective Contours in Visual Cortex,” Science 274, no. 5295 (1996), doi:10.1126/science.274.5295.2110.

‘When their energy use was obvious and easy to track: This story was told to Donella Meadows at a conference in Kollekolle, Denmark, in 1973. For more, see Donella Meadows and Diana Wright,
Thinking in Systems: A Primer (White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green, 2015), 109,

the stickers cut bathroom cleaning costs: The actual estimate was 8 percent, but given the variables used, anywhere between 5 percent and 10 percent savings annually is a reasonable guess. Blake
Evans-Pritchard, “Aiming to Reduce Cleaning Costs,” Works That Work, Winter 2013, https://worksthatwork.com/1/urinal-fly.

sleeping . . . was the only action that happened in that room: “Techniques involving stimulus control have even been successfully used to help people with insomnia. In short, those who had trouble
falling asleep were told to only go to their room and lie in their bed when they were tired. If they couldn’t fall asleep, they were told to get up and change rooms. Strange advice, but over
time, researchers found that by associating the bed with ‘It’s time to go to sleep’ and not with other activities (reading a book, just lying there, etc.), participants were eventually able to
quickly fall asleep due to the repeated process: it became almost automatic to fall asleep in their bed because a successful trigger had been created.” For more, see Charles M. Morin et al.,
“Psychological and Behavioral Treatment of Insomnia: Update of the Recent Evidence (1998-2004),” Sleep 29, no. 11 (2006), doi:10.1093/sleep/29.11.1398; and Gregory Ciouti, “The
Best Way to Change Your Habits? Control Your Environment,” Sparring Mind, https://www.sparringmind.com/changing-habits.

habits can be easier to change in a new environment: S. Thompson, J. Michaelson, S. Abdallah, V. Johnson, D. Morris, K. Riley, and A. Simms, ‘Moments of Change’ as Opportunities for Influencing
Behaviour: A Report to the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (London: Defra, 2011), _http://randd.defra.gov.uk/Document.aspx?
Document=MomentsofChangeE:V0506FinalReport Nov2011(2).pdt.

when you step outside your normal environment: Various research studies have found that it is easier to change your behavior when your environment changes. For example, students change their
television watching habits when they transfer schools, Wendy Wood and David T. Neal, “Healthy through Habit: Interventions for Initiating and Maintaining Health Behavior Change,”
Behavioral Science and Policy 2, no. 1 (2016), doi:10.1353/bsp.2016.0008; W. Wood, L. Tam, and M. G. Witt, “Changing Circumstances, Distupting Habits,” Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 88, no. 6 (2005), doi:10.1037/0022—3514.88.6.918

You aren’t battling old environmental cues: Perhaps this is why 36 percent of successful changes in behavior were associated with a move to a new place. Melissa Guerrera-Witt, Wendy Wood, and
Leona Tam, “Changing Circumstances, Disrupting Habits,” PsycEXTRA Dataset 88, no. 6 (2005), doi:10.1037/e529412014-144.

CHAPTER 7

Follow-up research revealed that 35 percent of service members: Lee N. Robins et al., “Vietnam Veterans Three Years after Vietnam: How Our Study Changed Our View of Heroin,” American
Journal on Addictions 19, no. 3 (2010), doi:10.1111/}.1521-0391,2010,00046.x.

the creation of the Special Action Office of Drug Abuse Prevention: “Excerpts from President’s Message on Drug Abuse Control,” New York Times, June 18, 1971,
/htips://www_nytimes.com/1971/06/18/archives/excerpts-from-presidents-message-on-drug-abuse-control.html,

nine out of ten soldiers who used heroin in Vietnam: Lee N. Robins, Darlene H. Davis, and David N. Nurco, “How Permanent Was Vietnam Drug Addiction?” American Journal of Public Health 64,
no. 12 (suppl.) (1974), doi:10.2105/ajph.64.12_suppl.38.

90 percent of heroin users become readdicted: Bobby P. Smyth et al., “Lapse and Relapse following Inpatient Treatment of Opiate Dependence,” Irish Medical Journal 103, no. 6 (June 2010).

“disciplined” people are better at structuring their lives: Wilhelm Hofmann et al., “Everyday Temptations: An Experience Sampling Study on How People Control Their Desires,” PsycEXTRA
Dataset 102, no. 6 (2012), doi:10.1037/e634112013-146.

It’s easier to practice self-restraint when you don’t have to use it: “Our prototypical model of self-control is angel on one side and devil on the other, and they battle it out. . .. We tend to think of
people with strong willpower as people who are able to fight this battle effectively. Actually, the people who are really good at self-control never have these battles in the first place.” For
more, see Brian Resnick, “The Myth of Self-Control,” Vox, November 24, 2016, https://www.vox.com/science-and-health/2016/1 1/3/13486940/self-control-psychology-myth.

A habit that has been encoded in the mind is ready to be used: Wendy Wood and Dennis Ringer, “Psychology of Habit,” Annual Review of Psychology 67, no. 1 (2016), doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-
122414-033417.

The cues were still internalized: “The Biology of Motivation and Habits: Why We Drop the Ball,” Therapist Uncensored), 20:00, http://www.therapistuncensored.com/biology-of-motivation-habits,
accessed June 8, 2018.

Shaming obese people with weight-loss presentations: Sarah E. Jackson, Rebecca J. Beeken, and Jane Wardle, “Perceived Weight Discrimination and Changes in Weight, Waist Circumference, and
Weight Status,” Obesity, 2014, doi:10.1002/oby.20891.

Showing pictures of blackened lungs to smokers: Kelly McGonigal, The Upside of Stres:

showing addicts a picture of cocaine for just thirty-three milliseconds: Fran
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/magazine/2017/09/the-addicted-brain,

Why Stress Is Good for You, and How to Get Good at It (New York: Avery, 2016), xv.
Smith, “How Science Is Unlocking the Secrets of Addiction,” National Geographic, September 2017,

CHAPTER 8

Niko Tinbergen performed _a_ series of experiments: Nikolaas Tinbergen, The Herring Gull’s World (London: Collins, 1
http://www newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Nikolaas_Tinbergen, last modified September 30, 2016

the goose will pull any nearby round object: James L.. Gould, Ethology: The Mechanisms and Evolution of Behavior (New Yor

the modern food industry relies on stretching: Steven Witherly, Why Humans Like Junk Food (New York: 1Universe, 2007).

Nearly every food in a bag: “Tweaking Tastes and Creating Cravings,” 60 Minutes, November 27, 2011. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a7Wh3uqlyTe.

French fries . .. are a potent combination: Steven Witherly, Why Humans Like Junk Food (New York: [Universe, 2007).

such strategies enable food scientists to find the “bliss point”: Michael Moss, Salt, Sugar, Fat: How the Food Giants Hooked Us (London: Allen, 2014).

“We've gotten too good at pushing our own buttons”: This quote originally appeared in Stephan Guyenet, “Why Are Some People ‘Carboholics’?” July 26, 2017,
hhtip://Avww.stephanguyenet.com/why-are-some-people-carboholics. The adapted version is given with permission granted in an email exchange with the author in April 2018.

The importance of dopamine: “The importance of dopamine was discovered by accident, In 1954, James Olds and Peter Milner, two neuroscientists at McGill University, decided to implant an
electrode deep into the center of a rat’s brain. The precise placement of the electrode was largely happenstance; at the time, the geography of the mind remained a mystery. But Olds and
Milner got lucky. They inserted the needle right next to the nucleus accumbens (NAcc), a part of the brain that generates pleasurable feelings. Whenever you eat a piece of chocolate cake,
or listen to a favorite pop song, or watch your favorite team win the World Series, it is your NAcc that helps you feel so happy. But Olds and Milner quickly discovered that too much
pleasure can be fatal. They placed the electrodes in several rodents’ brains and then ran a small current into each wire, making the NAccs continually excited. The scientists noticed that the
rodents lost interest in everything. They stopped eating and drinking. All courtship behavior ceased. The rats would just huddle in the corners of their cages, transfixed by their bliss. Within
days, all of the animals had perished. They died of thirst. For more, see Jonah Lehrer, How We Decide (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2009).

neurological processes behind craving and desire: James Olds and Peter Milner, “Positive Reinforcement Produced by Electrical Stimulation of Septal Area and Other Regions of Rat Brain,” Journal
of Comparative and Physiological Psychology 47, no, 6 (1954), doi:10.1037/h0058775.

rats lost_all_ will to live: Qun-Yong Zhou and Richard D. Palmiter, “Dopamine-Deficient Mice Are Severely Hypoactive, Adipsic, and Aphagic,” Cell 83, no. 7 (1995), doi:10.1016/0092—
8674(95)90145-0.

without desire, action stopped: Kent C, Berridge, Isabel L. Venier, and Terry E. Robinson, “Taste Reactivity Analysis of 6-Hydroxydopamine-Induced Aphagi
Anhedonia Hypotheses of Dopamine Function,” Behavioral Neuroscience 103, no. 1 (1989), doi:10.1037//0735-7044.103.1.36.

the mice developed a craving so strong: Ross A. Mcdevitt et al., “Serotonergic versus Nonserotonergic Dorsal Raphe Projection Neurons: Differential Participation in Reward Circuitry,” Cell Reports
8, no. 6 (2014), doi:10.1016/j.cel rep.2014.08.037.

the average slot machine player: Natasha Dow Schiill, Addiction by Design: Machine Gambling in Las Vegas (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2014), 55.

Habits are a dopamine-driven feedback loop: I first heard the term dopamine-driven feedback loop from Chamath Palihapitiya. For more, see “Chamath Palihapitiya, Founder and CEO Social Capital,
on Money as an Instrument of Change,” Stanford Graduate School of Business, November 13, 2017, https://www. youtube.com/watch?v=PMotykw0SIk.

dopamine . . . plays a central role in many neurological processes: Researchers later discovered that endorphins and opioids were responsible for pleasure responses. For more, see V. S. Chakravarthy,
Denny Joseph, and Raju S. Bapi, “What Do the Basal Ganglia Do? A Modeling Perspective,” Biological Cybernetics 103, no. 3 (2010), doi:10.1007/s00422-010-0401-y.

dopamine is released not only when you experience pleasure: Wolfram Schultz, “Neuronal Reward and Decision Signals: From Theories to Data,” Physiological Reviews 95, no. 3 (2015),
doi:10.1152/physrev.00023.2014, fig. 8; Fran Smith, “How Science Is Unlocking the Secrets of Addiction,” National Geographic, September 2017,
hups://www.nationalgeographic.com/magazine/2017/09/the-addicted-brain,

whenever dopamine rises, so does your motivation: Dopamine compels you to seek, explore, and take action: “Dopamine-energized, this mesolimbic SEEKING system, arising from the ventral
tegmental area (VTA), encourages foraging, exploration, investigation, curiosity, interest and expectancy. Dopamine fires each time the rat (or human) explores its environment. . . . I can
look at the animal and tell when I am tickling its SEEKING system because it is exploring and sniffing,” For more, see Karin Badt, “Depressed? Your ‘SEEKING’ System Might Not Be
Working: A Conversation with Neuroscientist Jaak Panksepp,” Huffington Post, December 6, 2017, http://www.huffingtonpost.com/karin-badv/depressed-your-seeking-
sy_b_3616967.html,

the reward system that is activated in the brain: Wolfram Schultz, “Multiple Reward Signals in the Brain,” Nature Reviews Neuroscience 1, no. 3 (2000), doi:10.1

100 percent of the nucleus accumbens is activated during wanting: Kent Berridge, conversation with author, March 8, 2017,

Byrne hacked his stationary bike: Hackster Staff, “Netflix and Cycle!,” Hackster, July 12, 2017, https://blog hackster.io/netflix-and-cycle-1734d0179deb,

“eliminating obesity one Netflix binge at a time”: “Cycflix: Exercise Powered Entertainment,” Roboro, July 8, 2017, https://www. youtube.com/watch?v=-nc0itLB-iY

“We see Thursday night as a viewership opportunity”: Jeanine Poggi, “Shonda Rhimes Looks Beyond ABC’s Nighttime Soaps,” AdAge, May 16, 2016, http://adage.com/article/special-report-tv-
upfront/shonda-thim

“more probable behaviors will reinforce less probable behaviors’

; “Nikolas Tinbergen,” New World Encyclopedia,

: Norton, 1982), 36-41.

implications for Arousal and

044563,

jon E, Roeckelein, Dictionary of Theories, Laws, and Concepts in Psychology (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1998), 384.

CHAPTER 9

“A_genius is _not born, but is educated and trained”: Harold Lundstom, “Father of 3 Prodigies Says Chess Genius Can Be Taught,” Deseret News, December 25, 1992,
https://www. deseretnews.com/article/266378/FA THER-OF-3-PRODIGIES-SA YS-CHESS-GENIUS-CAN-BE-TAUGHT. html?pg=all.

We imitate the habits of three groups: Peter J. Richerson and Robert Boyd, Not by Genes Alone: How Culture Transformed Human Evolution (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006).

“a person’s chances of becoming obese increased by 57 percent”: Nicholas A. Christakis and James H. Fowler, “The Spread of Obesity in a Large Social Network over 32 Years,” New England
Journal of Medicine 357, no. 4 (2007), doi:10.1056/nejmsa066082. J. A. Stockman, “The Spread of Obesity in a Large Social Network over 32 Years,” Yearbook of Pediatrics 2009
(2009), doi:10.1016/s0084-3954(08)79134-6,

if one person in a relationship lost weight: Amy A. Gorin et al., “Randomized Controlled Trial Examining the Ripple Effect of a Nationally Available Weight Management Program on Untreated
Spouses,” Obesity 26, no. 3 (2018), doi:10,1002/oby.22098.

Of the ten people in the class, four became astronauts: Mike Massimino, “Finding the Difference Between ‘Improbable’ and ‘Impossible,
January 2017, https://jamesaltucher.com/2017/01/mike-massimino-i-am-not-good-enough.

the higher your best friend’s IQ at age eleven or twelve: Ryan Meldrum, Nicholas Kavish, and Brian Boutwell, “On the Longitudinal Association Between Peer and Adolescent Intelligence: Can Our
Friends Make Us Smarter?,” PsyArXiv, February 10, 2018, doi:10.17605/OSF.IO/TVJ9Z.

Solomon Asch conducted a series of experiments: Harold Steere Guetzkow, Groups, Leadership and Men: Research in Human Relations (Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Press, 1951), 177-190.

By the end of the experiment, nearly 75 percent of the subjects: Follow-up studies show that if there was just one actor in the group who disagreed with the group, then the subject was far more likely
to state their true belief that the lines were different lengths. When you have an opinion that dissents from the tribe, it is much easier to stand by it if you have an ally. When you need the
strength to stand up to the social norm, find a partner. For more, see Solomon E. Asch, “Opinions and Social Pressure,” Scientific American 193, no. 5 (1955),
doi:10,1038/scientificamerican1 155-31; and William N. Mortis and Robert S, Miller, “The Effects of Consensus-Breaking and Consensus-Preempting Partners on Reduction of
Conformity,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 11, no. 3 (1975), doi:10.1016/s0022—1031(75)80023-0.

Nearly 75 percent of subjects made the incorrect choice at least once. However, considering the total number of responses throughout the experiment, about two thirds were correct, Either
way, the point stands: group pressure can significantly alter our ability to make accurate decisions,

a chimpanzee learns an effective way: Lydia V. Luncz, Giulia Sirianni, Roger Mundry, and Christophe Boesch, “Costly culture: differences in nut-cracking efficiency between wild chimpanzee

groups.” Animal Behaviour 137 (201 3-73.

interview by James Altucher, The James Altucher Show,

CHAPTER 10

I wouldn’t say, “Because I need food to survive”: I heard a similar example from the Twitter account, simpolism (@simpolism), “Let’s extend this metaphor. If society is a human body, then the state
is the brain. Humans are unaware of their motives. If asked ‘why do you eat?” you might say ‘bc food tastes good’ and not ‘bc I need food to survive.’ What might a state’s food be? (hint:
are pills food?),” Twitter, May 7, 2018, htips://twitter.com/simpolism/status/993632142700826624,

when emotions and feelings are impaired: Antoine Bechara et al., “Insensitivity to Future Consequences following Damage to Human Prefrontal Cortex,” Cognition 50, no. 1-3 (1994),
doi:10.1016/0010-0277(94)90018-3.

As the neuroscientist Antonio Damasio: “When Emotions Make Better Decisions—Antonio Damasio,” August 11, 2009. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1wup_K2WNOI

You don’t “have” to, You “get” to: I am indebted to my college strength and conditioning coach, Mark Watts, who originally shared this simple mind-set shift with me.

“Pm_not confined to my wheelchair”: RedheadBanshee, “What Is Something Someone Said That Forever Changed Your Way of Thinking,” Reddit, October 22, 2014,
https://www.reddit,com/r/AskReddit/comments/2jzn0j/what_is_something_someone_said_that_forever/clgm4s2,

“It’s time to build endurance and get fast”: WingedAdventurer, “Instead of Thinking ‘Go Run in the Morning,’ Think “Go Build Endurance and Get Fast.’ Make Your Habit a Benefit, Not a Task,”
Reddit, January 19, 2017, https://www.reddit.com/t/selfimprovement/comments/Sovrqf/instead_of_thinking_go_run_in_the_morning_think/?st=izmz9pks&sh=059312db.

“Pm getting an adrenaline rush to help me concentrate”: Alison Wood Brooks, “Get Excited: Reappraising Pre-Performance Anxiety as Excitement with Minimal Cues,” PsycEXTRA Dataset, June

2014, doi:10,1037/e578192014-321; Caroline Webb, How to Have a Good Day (London: Pan Books, 2017), 238. “Wendy Berry Mendes and Jeremy Jamieson have conducted a number

of studies [that] show that people perform better when they decide to interpret their fast heartbeat and breathing as ‘a resource that aids performance.’

Ed Latimore, a boxer and + Ed Latimore (@EdLatimore), “Odd realization: My focus and concentration goes up just by putting my headphones [on] while writing, I don’t even have to play any
music,” Twitter, May 7, 2018, https://twitter.com/EdLatimore/status/99349649317 1662849.

CHAPTER 11

In the end, they had little to show for their efforts: This story comes from page 29 of Art & Fear by David Bayles and Ted Orland. In an email conversation with Orland on October 18, 2016, he
explained the origins of the story. “Yes, the ‘ceramics story’ in ‘Art & Fear’ is indeed true, allowing for some literary license in the retelling. Its real-world origin was as a gambit employed
by photographer Jerry Uelsmann to motivate his Beginning Photography students at the University of Florida, As retold in ‘Art & Fear’ it faithfully captures the scene as Jerry told it to me
—except | replaced photography with ceramics as the medium being explored. Admittedly, it would’ve been easier to retain photography as the art medium being discussed, but David
Bayles (co-author) & I are both photographers ourselves, and at the time we were consciously trying to broaden the range of media being referenced in the text. The intriguing thing to me
is that it hardly matters what art form was invoked—the moral of the story appears to hold equally true straight across the whole art spectrum (and even outside the arts, for that matter).”
Later in that same email, Orland said, “You have our permission to reprint any or all of the ‘ceramics’ passage in your forthcoming book.” In the end, I settled on publishing an adapted
version, which combines their telling of the ceramics story with facts from the original source of Uelsmann’s photography students. David Bayles and Ted Orland, Art & Fear:
Observations on the Perils (and Rewards) of Artmaking (Santa Cruz, CA: Image Continuum Press, 1993), 29.

As Voltaire once wrote: Voltaire, La Bégueule, Conte Moral (1772).

Tong-term potentiation: Long-term potentiation was discovered by Terje Lamo in 1966. More precisely, he discovered that when a series of s
persistent effect that lasted afterward that made it easier for those signals to be transmitted in the future,

“Neurons that fire together wire together”: Donald O. Hebb, The Organization of Behavior: A Neuropsychological Theory (New York: Wiley, 1949).

In musicians, the cerebellum: S. Hutchinson, “Cerebellar Volume of Musicians,” Cerebral Cortex 13, no. 9 (2003), doi:10.1093/cercor/13.9.943.

‘Mathematicians, meanwhile, have increased gray matter: A. Verma, “Increased Gray Matter Density in the Parietal Cortex of Mathematicians: A Voxel-Based Morphometry Study,” Yearbook of
‘Neurology and Neurosurgery 2008 (2008), doi:10.1016/s0513-5117(08)79083-5.

‘When scientists analyzed the brains of taxi drivers in London: Eleanor A. Maguire et al., “Navigation-Related Structural Change in the Hippocampi of Taxi Drivers,” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 97, no. 8 (2000), doi:10.1073/pnas.070039597; Katherine Woollett and Eleanor A. Maguire, “Acquiring ‘the Knowledge’ of London’s Layout Drives Structural Brain
Changes,” Current Biology 21, no. 24 (December 2011), doi:10.1016/j.cub.2011.11.018; Eleanor A. Maguire, Katherine Woollett, and Hugo J. Spiers, “London Taxi Drivers and Bus
Drivers: A Structural MRI and Neuropsychological Analysis,” Hippocampus 16, no. 12 (2006), doi:10.1002/hipo.20233.

“the actions become so automatic”: George Henry Lewes, The Physiology of Common Life (Leipzig: Tauchnitz, 1860).

repetition is a form of change: Apparently, Brian Eno says the same thing in his excellent, creatively inspiring Oblique Strategies card set, which | didn’t know when I wrote this Ii
all that,

Automaticity is the ability to perform a behavior: Phillippa Lally et al., “How Are Habits Formed: Modelling Habit Formation in the Real World,” European Journal of Social Psychology 40, no. 6
(2009), doi:10.1002/ejsp.674.

habits form based on frequency, not time: Hermann Ebbinghaus was the first person to describe learning curves in his 1885 book Uber das Gedéchtnis, Hermann Ebbinghaus, Memory: A Contribution

‘perimental Psychology (United States: Scholar Select, 2016).

nals was repeatedly transmitted by the brain, there was a

e! Great minds and

CHAPTER 12

this difference in shape played a significant role in the spread of agriculture: Jared Diamond, Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies (New York: Norton, 1997).

It is human nature to follow the Law of Least Effort: Deepak Chopra uses the phrase “law of least effort” to describe one of his Seven Spiritual Laws of Yoga. This concept is not related to the
principle I am discussing here.

arden hose that is bent in the middle: This analogy is a modified version of an idea Josh Waitzkin mentioned in

May 2, 2014, audio, https://soundcloud,com/tim-ferriss/the-tim-ferriss-show-episode-2-josh-waitzkin,

“it_took American workers three times as long to assemble their sets”: James Surowiecki, “Better All the Time,” New Yorker, November 10, 2014,
Ihttps://www_newyorker.com/magazine/2014/11/10/better-time,

addition by subtraction: Addition by subtraction is an example of a larger principle known as inversion, which I have written about previously at https://jamesclear.com/inversion. I’m indebted to Shane
Parrish for priming my thoughts on this topic by writing about why “avoiding stupidity is easier than seeking brilliance.” Shane Parrish, “Avoiding Stupidity Is Easier Than Seeking
Brilliance,” Farnam Street, June 2014, https://www.fs.blog/2014/06/avoiding-stupidity.

those_percentage points represent millions in tax revenue: Owain Service et al., “East: Four Simple Ways to Apply Behavioural Insights,” Behavioural Insights Team, 2015,
htip://38r8om2xjhhl25mw24492dir. wpengine.netdna-cdn,com/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/BIT-Publication-EAST_FA_WEB.pdf.

Nuckols dialed in his cleaning habits: Oswald Nuckols is an alias, used by request.

“perfect time to clean the toilet”: Saul_Panzer_NY, “[Question] What One Habit Literally Changed Your Life?” Reddit, June 5, 2017, _ https://www.reddit.com/r/get
disciplined/comments/6fgqbv/question_what_one_habit_literally_changed_your/diieswa.

is interview with Tim Ferriss. “The Tim Ferriss Show, Episode 2: Josh Waitzkin,”

CHAPTER 13

“arsenal of routines”: Twyla Tharp and Mark Reiter, The Creative Habit: Learn It and Use It for Life: A Practical Guide (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2006).
40 50 percent of our _actions_on any _ given day _are__done__out__of _ habit: Wendy Wood, “Habits Across the Lifespan,” 2006,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/315552294_Habits_Across_the_Lifespan,
habits you follow without thinking: Benjamin Gardner, “A Review and Analysis of the Use of ‘Habit’ in Understanding, Predicting and Influencing Health-Related Behaviour,” Health Psychology
Review 9, no. 3 (2014), doi:10.1080/17437199.2013.876238.
decisive moments: Shoutout to Henri Cartier-Bresson, one of the greatest street photographers of all time, who coined the term decisive moment, but for an entirely different purpose: capturing amazing
images at just the right time.
the Two-Minute Rule: Hat tip to David Allen, whose version of the Two-Minute Rule states, “If it takes less than two minutes, then do it now.” For more, see David Allen, Getting Things Done (New
York: Penguin, 2015).
jown habit: Author Cal Newport uses a shutdown ritual in which he does a last email inbox check, prepares his to-do list for the next day, and says “shutdown complete” to end work for the day.
For more, see Cal Newport, Deep Work (Boston: Little, Brown, 2016).
He always stopped journaling before it seemed like a hassle: Greg McKeown, Essentialism: The Disciplined Pursuit of Less (New York: Crown, 2014), 78.
habit shaping: Gail B, Peterson, “A Day of Great Illumination: B. F, Skinner’s Discovery of Shaping,” Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior 82, no. 3 (2004), doi:10.1901/jeab.2004.82-317..

powei

CHAPTER 14

he remained in his study and wrote furiously: Adéle Hugo and Charles E. Wilbour, Victor Hugo, by a Witness of His Life (New York: Carleton, 1864).
A commitment device is a choice you make in the present: Gharad Bryan, Dean Karlan, and Scott Nelson, “Commitment Devices,” Annual Review of Economics 2, no. 1 (2010),

doi:10,1146/annurev.economics. 102308.124324,
outlet timer cuts off the power to the router: “Nir Eyal: Addictive Tech, Killing Bad Habits & Apps for Life Hacking—#260,” interview by Dave Asprey, Bulletproof, November 13, 2015,

https://blog. bulletproof.com/nir-eyal-life-hacking-260/,
This is also referred to as a “Ulysses pact”: Peter Ubel, “The Ulysses Strategy,” The New Yorker, December 11, 2014, https://www.newyorker.com/business/currency/ulysses-strategy-self-control,

Patterson’s business went from losing money to making $5,000 in profit: “John H. Patterson—Ringing Up Success with the Incorruptible Cashier,” Dayton Innovation Legacy,
http://www.daytoninnovationlegacy.org/patterson.html, accessed June 8, 2016.

onetime actions that lead to better long-term habits: James Clear (@james_clear), “What are onetime actions that pay off again and again in the future?” Twitter, February 11, 2018,
hhtips://twitter.comi/james_clear/status/962694722702790659

“Civilization advances by extending the number of operations”: Alfred North Whitehead, Introduction to Mathematics (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1911), 166.
day _on___social_ media: “GW Social,” GlobalWebIndex, 2017, Q3,

The _average _person___spends_—over_—itwo__—ihours —_per
https://cdn2.hubspot.net/hubfs/304927/Downloads/GW1%20Social%20Summary%20Q3%202017.pdf.

CHAPTER 15

over nine million people called _it_ home: “Population Size and = Growth = of_— Major. ies, 1998 Census,” Population Census Organization,
http://www.pbs.gov.pk/sites/default/files//tables/POPULA TION%20SIZE%20AND%20GROWTH%200F%20MAJOR%20CITIES.pdf.

Over 60 percent of Karachi’s residents: Sabiah Askari, Studies on Karachi: Papers Presented at the Karachi Conference 2013 (Newcastle upon Tyne, UK: Cambridge Scholars, 2015).

It was this public health crisis that had brought Stephen Luby to Pakistan: Atul Gawande, The Checklist Manifesto: How to Get Things Right (Gurgaon, India: Penguin Random House, 2014)

“In Pakistan, Safeguard was a premium soap”: All quotes in this section are from an email conversation with Stephen Luby on May 28, 2018.

The rate of diarrhea fell by 52 percent: Stephen P. Luby et al., “Effect of Handwashing on Child Health: A Randomised Controlled Trial,” Lancet 366, no. 9481 (2005), doi:10.1016/s0140—
6736(05)66912-7.

“Over 95 percent of households”: Anna Bowen, Mubina Agboatwalla, Tracy Ayers, Timothy Tobery, Maria Tariq, and Stephen P. Luby. “Sustained improvements in handwashing indicators more than
5 years after a cluster-randomised, community-based tial of handwashing promotion in Karachi, Pakistan,” Tropical Medicine & International Health 18, no. 3 (2013): 259-267.
hups://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4626884/

Chewing gum had been sold commercially throughout the 1800s: Mary Bellis, “How We Have Bubble Gum Today,” ThoughtCo, October 16, 2017, https:
and-chewing-gum-1991856.

Wrigley revolutionized the industry: Jennifer P. Mathews, Chicle: The Chewing Gum of the Americas, from the Ancient Maya to William Wrigley (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 2009), 44-46.

Wrigley became the largest chewing gum company: “William Wrigley, Jr.,” Encyclopedia Britannica, https://www.britannica.com/biography/William-Wrigley-Jr, accessed June 8, 2018.

‘Toothpaste had a similar trajectory: Charles Duhigg, The Power of Habit: Why We Do What We Do in Life and Business (New York: Random House, 2014), chap. 2.

he_ started avoiding her: Sparkly_alpaca, “What Are the Coolest Psychology Tricks That You Know or Have Used?” Reddit, November 11, 2016,
hitps://www.reddit.com/r/AskReddit/comments/Scgqbj/what_are_the_coolest_psychology_tricks_that_you/d9wcqsr/.

‘The earliest remains of modern humans: lan Mcdougall, Francis H. Brown, and John G. Fleagle, “Stratigraphic Placement and Age of Modern Humans from Kibis
(2005), doi:10.1038/nature03258,

‘was roughly the same: Some research indicates that the size of the human brain reached modem proportions around three hundred thousand years ago. Evolution never stops, of
course, and the shape of the structure appears to have continued to evolve in meaningful ways until it reached both modern size and shape sometime between one hundred thousand and
thirty-five thousand years ago. Simon Neubauer, Jean-Jacques Hublin, and Philipp Gunz, “The Evolution of Modern Human Brain Shape,” Science Advances 4, no. 1 (2018): eaao5961.

society has shifted to a predominantly delayed-return environment: The original research on this topic used the terms delayed-return societies and immediate-return societies. James Woodburn,
“Egalitarian Societies,” Man 17, no. 3 (1982), doi:10.2307/2801707. I first heard of the difference between immediate-return environments and delayed-return environments in a lecture
from Mark Leary. Mark Leary, Understanding the Mysteries of Human Behavior (Chantilly, VA: Teaching, 2012).

The world has changed much in recent years: The rapid environmental changes of recent centuries have far outpaced our biological ability to adapt. On average, it takes about twenty-five thousand
years for meaningful genetic changes to be selected for in a human population. For more, see Edward O. Wilson, Sociobiology (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 1980), 151.

our brains evolved to prefer quick payoffs to long-term ones: Daniel Gilbert, “Humans Wired to Respond to Short-Term Problems,” interview by Neal Conan, Talk of the Nation, NPR, July 3, 2006,
https://www_npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyld=5530483.

Disease and infection won’t show up for days or weeks, even years: The topics of irrational behavior and cognitive biases have become quite popular in recent years. However, many actions that seem
irrational on the whole have rational origins if you consider their immediate outcome.

Frédéric Bastiat: Frédéric Bastiat and W. B. Hodgson, What Is Seen and What Is Not Seen: Or Political Economy in One Lesson (London: Smith, 1859).

Future You: Hat tip to behavioral economist Daniel Goldstein, who said, “It’s an unequal battle between the present self and the future self. I mean, let’s face it, the present self is present. It’s in control.
It’s in power right now. It has these strong, heroic arms that can lift doughnuts into your mouth. And the future self is not even around. It’s off in the future. It’s weak. It doesn’t even have
a lawyer present. There’s nobody to stick up for the future self. And so the present self can trounce all over its dreams.” For more, see Daniel Goldstein, “The Battle between Your Present
and Future Self,” TEDSalon NY2011, November 2011, video, htips://www.ted.com/talks/daniel_goldstein_the_battle_between_your_present_and_future_self.

People who are better at delaying gratification have higher SAT scores: Walter Mischel, bbe B. Ebbesen, and Antonette Raskoff Zeiss, “Cognitive and Attentional Mechanisms in Delay of
Gratification,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 21, no. 2 (1972), doi:10.1037/h0032198; W. Mischel, Y. Shoda, and M. Rodriguez, “Delay of Gratification in Children,”
Science 244, no. 4907 (1989), doi:10.1126/science.2658056; Walter Mischel, Yuichi Shoda, and Philip K. Peake, “The Nature of Adolescent Competencies Predicted by Preschool Delay
of Gratification,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 54, no, 4 (1988), doi:10.1037//0022-3514.54.4.687; Yuichi Shoda, Walter Mischel, and Philip K. Peake, “Predicting
Adolescent Cognitive and Self-Regulatory Competencies from Preschool Delay of Gratification: Identifying Diagnostic Conditions,” Developmental Psychology 26, no. 6 (1990),
doiz10,1037//0012-1649,26.6.978.

;www.thoughtco.comv/history-of-bubble-

|, Ethiopia,” Nature 433, no, 7027

the neocortex

CHAPTER 16

“I would start with 120 paper clips in one jar”: Trent Dyrsmid, email to author, April 1, 2015.

Benjamin Franklin: Benjamin Franklin and Frank Woodworth Pine, Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin (New York: Holt, 1916), 148.

Don’t break the chain of creating every day: Shoutout to my friend Nathan Barry, who originally inspired me with the mantra, “Create Every Day.”

people who track their progress on goals like losing weight: Benjamin Harkin et al., “Does Monitoring Goal Progress Promote Goal Attainment? A Meta-analysis of the Experimental Evidence,”
Psychological Bulletin 142, no. 2 (2016), doi:10.1037/bul0000025.

those_who kept a daily food log lost twice as much weight as those who did not: Miranda Hitt, “Keeping Food Diary Helps Lose Weight,” WebMD, July 8, 2008,
htip://www.webmd,com/diet/news/20080708/keeping-food-diary-helps-lose-weight; Kaiser Permanente, “Keeping a Food Diary Doubles Diet Weight Loss, Study Suggests,” Science
Daily, July 8, 2008, https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2008/07/080708080738.htm; Jack F. Hollis et al., “Weight Loss during the Intensive Intervention Phase of the Weight-Loss
Maintenance Trial,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine 35, no, 2 (2008), doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2008.04,013; Lora E, Burke, Jing Wang, and Mary Ann Sevick, “Self-Monitoring in
Weight Loss: A Systematic Review of the Literature,” Journal of the American Dietetic Association 111, no. 1 (2011), doi:10.1016/j,jada.2010.10.008,

The most effective form of motivation is progress: This line is paraphrased from Greg McKeown, who wrote, “Research has shown that of all forms of human motivation the most effective one is
progress.” Greg McKeown, Essentialism: The Disciplined Pursuit of Less (Currency, 2014).

‘The first mistake is never the one that ruins you: In fact, research has shown that missing a habit once has virtually no impact on the odds of developing a habit over the long-term, regardless of when
the mistake occurs. As long as you get back on track, you're fine. See: Phillippa Lally et al., “How Are Habits Formed: Modelling Habit Formation in the Real World,” European Journal
of Social Psychology 40, no. 6 (2009), doi:10.1002/ejsp.674.

Missing once is an accident: “Missing once is an accident. Missing twice is the start of a new habit.” | swear I read this line somewhere or perhaps paraphrased it from something similar, but despite my
best efforts all of my searches for a source are coming up empty. Maybe I came up with it, but my best guess is it belongs to an unidentified genius instead

“When a measure becomes a target”: This definition of Goodhart’s Law was actually formulated by the British anthropologist Marilyn Strathern, “Improving Ratings’: Audit in the British University
System,” European Review 5 (1997) 305-321, _https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/european-review/article/improving-ratings-audit-in-the-british-university-
system/FC2EE640C0C44E3DB87C29FB666E9A AB. Goodhart himself reportedly advanced the idea sometime around 1975 and put it formally into writing in 1981. Charles Goodhart,
“Problems of Monetary Management: The U.K. Experience,” in Anthony S. Courakis (ed.), Inflation, Depression, and Economic Policy in the West (London: Rowman and Littlefield,
1981), 111-146.

CHAPTER 17

“When I suggested this to friends in the Pentagon”: Roger Fisher, “Preventing Nuclear War,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 37, no. 3 (1981), doi:10.1080/00963402.1981.11458828.

The first seat belt law: Michael Goryl and Michael Cynecki, “Restraint System Usage in the Traffic Population,” Journal of Safety Research 17, no. 2 (1986), doi:10.1016/0022-4375(86)90107-6.

wearing a seat belt is enforceable by law: New Hampshire is the lone exception, where seat belts are only required for children. “New Hampshire,” Governors Highway Safety Associ
https://www.ghsa.org/state-laws/states/new%20hampshire, accessed June 8, 2016,

over 88 percent of Americans buckled up: “Seat Belt Use in U.S. Reaches Historic 90 Percent,” National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, November 21, 2016, https://www.nhtsa.gow/press-
Teleases/seat-belt-use-us-reaches-historic-90-percent

Bryan Harris: Bryan Harris, email conversation with author, October 24, 2017.

She does the “song a day” challenge: Courtney Shea, “Comedian Margaret Cho’s Tips for Success: If You're Funny, Don’t Do Comedy,” Globe and Mail, July 1, 2013,
htips://www.theglobeandmail.com/life/comedian-margaret-chos-tips-for-success-if-youre-funny-dont-do-comedy/article12902304/?service=mobile,

Thomas Frank, an entrepreneur in Boulder, Colorado: Thomas Frank, “How Buffer Forces Me to Wake Up at 5:55 AM Every Day,” College Info Geek, July 2, 2014,
https://collegeinfogeek.com/early-waking-with-buffer/.

ion,

CHAPTER 18

Phelps has won more Olympic medals: “Michael Phelps Biography,” Biography, https://www.biography.com/people/michael-phelps-345192, last modified March 29, 2018,

El Guerror ij: Doug, Gillan, “El Guerrouj: The Greatest of All Time,” IAFF, November 15, 2004, https://www.iaaf.org/news/news/el-guerrouj-the-greatest-of-all-time.

they differ significantly in height: Heights and weights for Michael Phelps and Hicham El Guerrouj were pulled from their athlete profiles during the 2008 Summer Olympics. “Michael Phelps,” ESPN,
2008, _http://www.espn.com/olympics/summer08/fanguide/athlete?athlete=295471, “Hicham El Guerrouj,” ESPN, 2008, _http:/Awww.espn.com/oly/summer08/fanguide/athlete?
athlet 9886.

same length inseam on their pants: David Epstein, The Sports Gene: inside the Science of Extraordinary Athletic Performance (St. Louis, MO: Turtleback Books, 2014),

average height of Olympic gold medalists in the men’s 1,500-meter_run: Alex Hutchinson, “The Incredible Shrinking Marathoner,” Runner’s World, November 12, 2013,
https://www.runnersworld,com/sweat-science/the-incredible-shrinking-marathoner.

average height of Olympic gold medalists in the men’s 100-meter: Alvin Chang, “Want to Win Olympic Gold? Here’s How Tall You Should Be for Archery, Swimming, and More,” Vox, August 9,
2016, http://www.vox.com/2016/8/9/12387684/olympic-heights,

“Genes can predispose, but they don’t predetermine”: Gabor Maté, “Dr. Gabor Maté—New Paradigms, Ayahuasca, and Redefining Addiction,” The Tim Ferriss Show, February 20, 2018,
hhttps://tim. blog/2018/02/20/gabor-mate

Genes have been shown to influence everything: “All waits are heritable” is a bit of an exaggeration, but not by much. Concrete behavioral traits that patently depend on content provided by the home
or culture are, of course, not heritable at all; which language you speak, which religion you worship in, which political party you belong to. But behavioral traits that reflect the underlying
talents and temperaments are heritable: how proficient with language you are, how religious, how liberal or conservative. General intelligence is heritable, and so are the five major ways in
which personality can vary . . . openness to experience, conscientiousness, extroversion-introversion, antagonism-agreeableness, and neuroticism. And traits that are surprisingly specific
tum out to be heritable, too, such as dependence on nicotine or alcohol, number of hours of television watched, and likelihood of divorcing. Thomas J. Bouchard, “Genetic Influence on
Human Psychological Traits,” Current Directions in Psychological Science 13, no. 4 (2004), doi:10.1111/).0963-7214,2004,00295.x; Robert Plomin, Nature and Nurture: An Introduction
to Human Behavioral Genetics (Stamford, CT: Wadsworth, 1996); Robert Plomin, “Why We’re Different,” Edge, June 29, 2016, https://soundcloud.com/edgefoundationincledge2016-
robert-plomin.

‘There’s a_strong genetic component: Daniel Goleman, “Major Personality Study Finds ‘That Traits Are Mostly Inherited,” New York Times, December 2, 1986,
htip://vww.nytimes.com/1986/12/02/science/major-personality-study-finds-that-traits-are-mostly-inherited.html?pagewanted=all,

Robert Plomin: Robert Plomin, phone call with the author, August 9, 2016,

more likely to become introverts: Jerome Kagan et al., “Reactivity in Infants: A Cross-National Comparison,” Developmental Psychology 30, no. 3 (1994), doi:10.1037//0012-1649,30.3.342; Michael
V. Ellis and Erica S. Robbins, “In Celebration of Nature: A Dialogue with Jerome Kagan,” Journal of Counseling and Development 68, no. 6 (1990), doi:10,1002/j.1556—
6676.1990.tb01426.x; Brian R. Little, Me, Myself, and Us: The Science of Personality and the Art of Well-Being (New York: Public Affairs, 2016); Susan Cain, Quiet: The Power of
Introverts in a World That Can't Stop Talking (London: Penguin, 2013), 99-100.

People who are high in agreeableness: W. G. Graziano and R. M. Tobin, “The Cognitive and Motivational Foundations Underlying Agreeableness,” in M. D. Robinson, E. Watkins, and E, Harmon-
Jones, eds., Handbook of Cognition and Emotion (New York: Guilford, 2013), 347-364,

They also tend to have higher natural oxytocin levels: Mitsuhiro Matsuzaki et al., “Oxytocin: A Therapeutic Target for Mental Disorders,” Journal of Physiological Sciences 62, no. 6 (2012),
doi:10.1007/s12576-012-0232-9; Angeliki Theodoridou et al., “Oxytocin and Social Perception: Oxytocin Increases Perceived Facial Trustworthiness and Attractiveness,” Hormones and
Behavior 56, no. 1 (2009), doi:10.1016/}.yhbeh.2009.03.019; Anthony Lane et al., “Oxytocin Increases Willingness to Socially Share One’s Emotions,” International Journal of
Psychology 48, no. 4 (2013), doi:10.1080/00207594.2012.677540; Christopher Cardoso et al., “Stress-Induced Negative Mood Moderates the Relation between Oxytocin Administration
and Trust: Evidence for the Tend-and-Befriend Response to Stress?” Psychoneuroendocrinology 38, no. 11 (2013), doi:10.1016/j.psyneuen.2013.05.006.

vity of the amygdala: J. Ormel, A. Bastiaansen, H. Riese, E. H. Bos, M. Servaas, M. Ellenbogen, J. G. Rosmalen, and A. Aleman, “The Biological and Psychological Basis of Neuroticism:

Current Status and Future Directions,” Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 37, no. 1 (2013), doi:10.1016/j.neu biorev.2012.09.004. PMID 23068306; R. A. Depue and Y. Fu,
“Neurogenetic and Experiential Processes Underlying Major Personality Traits: Implications for Modelling Personality Disorders,” International Review of Psychiatry 23, no. 3 (2011),
doi:10.3109/09540261.2011.599315.

Our deeply rooted preferences make certain behaviors easier: “For example, all people have brain systems that respond to rewards, but in different individuals these systems will respond with
different degrees of vigor to a particular reward, and the systems’ average level of response may be associated with some personality trait.” For more, see Colin G. Deyoung, “Personality
Neuroscience and the Biology of Traits,” Social and Personality Psychology Compass 4, no. 12 (2010), doi:10.1111/j.1751-9004.2010,00327.x.

If your friend follows a low-carb diet: Research conducted in major randomized clinical trials shows no difference in low-carb versus low-fat diets for weight loss. As with many habits, there are many
ways to the same destination if you stick with it. For more, see Christopher D. Gardner et al., “Effect of Low-Fat vs Low-Carbohydrate Diet on 12-Month Weight Loss in Overweight
Adults and the Association with Genotype Pattern or Insulin Secretion,” Journal of the American Medical Association 319, no, 7 (2018), doi:10.1001/jama.2018.0245,

explore/exploit trade-off: M. A. Addicott et al., “A Primer on Foraging and the Explore/Exploit Trade-Off for Psychiatry Research,” Neuropsychopharmacology 42, no. 10 (2017),
doi:10.1038/npp.2017.108.

Google famously asks employees: Bharat Mediratta and Julie Bick, “The Google Way:
https://www.nytimes.com/2007/10/21/jobs/21pre.html.

“Flow is the mental state”: Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Finding Flow: The Psychology of Engagement with Everyday Life (New York: Basic Books, 2008).

“Everyone has at least a few areas”: Scott Adams, “Career Advice,” Dilbert Blog, July 20, 2007, http://dilbertblog.typepad.com/the_dilbert_blog/2007/07/career-advice.html.

jive Engineers Room,” New York Times, October 21

» 2007,

CHAPTER 19

most successful comedians: Steve Martin, Born Standing Up: A Comic’s Life (Leicester, UK: Charnwood, 2008).

“4 years as a wild success”: Steve Martin, Born Standing Up: A Comic’s Life (Leicester, UK: Charnwood, 2008), 1.

“just manageable difficulty”: Nicholas Hobbs, “The Psychologist as Administrator,” Journal of Clinical Psychology 15, no. 3 (1959), doi:10.1002/1097-4679(195907)15:33.0.co; 2-4; Gilbert Brim,
Ambition: How We Manage Success and Failure Throughout Our Lives (Lincoln, NE: [Universe.com, 2000); Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Finding Flow: The Psychology of Engagement with
Everyday Life (New York: Basic Books, 2008).

In psychology research this is known as the Yerkes-Dodson law: Robert Yerkes and John Dodson, “The Relation of Strength of Stimulus to Rapidity of Habit Formation,” Journal of Comparative
Neurology and Psychology 18 (1908): 459-482.

4 percent beyond your current ability: Steven Kotler, The Rise of Superman: Decoding the Science of Ultimate Human Performance (Boston: New Harvest, 2014). In his book, Kotler cites: “Chip
Conley, AI, September 2013. The real ratio, according to calculations performed by [Mihaly] Csikszentmihalyi, is 1:96.”
‘Men desire novelty to such an extent”: Niccolé Machiavelli, Peter Bondanella, and Mark Musa, The Portable Machiavelli (London: Penguin, 2005).

variable reward: C. B. Ferster and B, F. Skinner, “Schedules of Reinforcement,” 1957, doi:10.1037/10627-000. For more, see B. F. Skinner, “A Case History in Scientific Method,” American

Psychologist 11, no. 5 (1956): 226, doi:10.1037/n0047662.

This variance leads to the greatest_spike of dopamine: Matching Law shows that the
htips://en. wikipedia.org/wiki/Matching law.

rate of the reward schedule impacts behavior: “Matching Law,” Wikipedia,

CHAPTER 20

there is usually a slight decline in performance: K, Anders Ericsson and Robert Pool, Peak: Secrets from the New Science of Expertise (Boston: Mariner Books, 2017), 13.

“The pundits were saying”: Pat Riley and Byron Laursen, “Temporary Insanity and Other Management Techniques: The Los Angeles Lakers’ Coach Tells All,” Los Angeles Times Magazine, April 19,
1987, http://articles.latimes.com/1987—04—19/magazine/tm-1669_1_lakers.

a system that he called the Career Best Effort program or CBE: MacMullan’s book claims that Riley began his CBE program during the 1984-1985 NBA season. My research shows that the Lakers
began tracking statistics of individual players at that time, but the CBE program as it is described here was first used in 1986-1987.

If they succeeded, it would be a CBE: Larry Bird, Earvin Johnson, and Jackie MacMullan, When the Game Was Ours (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2010).

“Sustaining an effort”: Pat Riley and Byron Laursen, “Temporary Insanity and Other Management Techniques: The Los Angeles Lakers’ Coach Tells All,” Los Angeles Times Magazine, April 19,
1987, http://articles.latimes.com/1987—04—19/magazine/tm-1669_1_lakers.

Eliud Kipchoge: Cathal Dennehy, “The Simple Life of One of the World’s Best Marathoners,” Runner’s World, April 19, 2016, ittps://www.runnersworld.com/elite-runners/the-simple-life-of-one-of-
the-worlds-best-marathoners. “Eliud Kipchoge: Full Training Log Leading Up to Marathon World Record Attempt,” Sweat Elite, 2017, http://www.sweatelite,co/eliud-kipchoge-full-
training-log-leading-marathon-world-record-attempv/.

her_coach_goes over her notes and adds his thoughts: Yuri Suguiyama, “Training Katie Ledecky,” American Swimming Coaches Association, November 30, 2016,
httpsi//swimmingcoach.org/training-katie-ledecky-by-yuri-suguiyama-curl-burke-swim-club-2012/,

When comedian Chris Rock is preparing fresh material: Peter Sims, “Innovate Like Chris Rock,” Harvard Business Review, January 26, 2009, https://hbr.org/2009/0 I/innovate-like-chris-rock.

Annual Review: I'd like to thank Chris Guillebeau, who inspired me to start my own annual review process by publicly sharing his annual review each year at https://chrisguillebeau,com.

“keep your identity small”: Paul Graham, “Keep Your Identity Small,” February 2009, http://www. paulgraham.com/identity.html,

CONCLUSION

No one can be rich unless one coin can make him or her so: Desiderius Erasmus and Van Loon Hendrik Willem, The Praise of Folly (New York: Black, 1942), 31. Hat tip to Gretchen Rubin. 1 first
read about this parable in her book, Better Than Before, and then tracked down the origin story. For more, see Gretchen Rubin, Better Than Before (New York: Hodder, 2016).

LITTLE LESSONS FROM THE FOUR LAWS

“Happiness is the space between one desire”: Caed (@caedbudris), “Happiness is the space between desire being fulfilled and a new desire forming,” Twitter, November 10, 2017,
hhtips://twitter. com/caedbudris/status/929042389930594304,

happiness cannot be pursued, it must ensue: Frankl’s full quotation is as follows: “Don’t aim at success. The more you aim at it and make it a target, the more you are going to miss it. For success, like
happiness, cannot be pursued; it must ensue, and it only does so as the unintended side effect of one’s personal dedication to a cause greater than oneself or as the by-product of one’s
surrender to a person other than oneself.” For more, see Viktor E. Frankl, Man’s Search for Meaning: An Introduction to Logotherapy (Boston: Beacon Press, 1962).

“He who has a why to live for can bear almost any how”: Friedrich Nietzsche and Oscar Levy, The Twilight of the Idols (Edinburgh: Foulis, 1909).

Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2015).

appealing to emotion is typically more powerful than appealing to reason: “If you wish to persuade, appeal to interest, rather than reason” (Benjamin Franklin).

Satisfaction = Liking - Wanting: This is similar to David Meister’ fifth law of service businesses: Satisfaction = perception - expectation,

“Being poor is not having too little, it is wanting more”: Lucius Annaeus Seneca and Anna Lydia Motto, Moral Epistles (Chico, CA: Scholars Press, 1985).

As Aristotle noted: It is debated whether Aristotle actually said this. The quote has been attributed to him for centuries, but I could find no primary source for the phrase,

‘The feeling comes first (System 1): Da

BCDEFGHIJKLMNOPORSTUVWXYZ

Index

‘The page numbers in this index refer to the printed version of this book. The link provided will take you to the beginning of that print page. You may need to scroll forward from that location to find the
corresponding reference on your e-reader,

accepting that you have particular abilities, 218-19
accountability, 209-10
action vs, motion, 142-43
Adams, Scott, 23, 225
addiction
effect of environment on readdiction, 92,
smoking, 125-26
Vietnam War heroin problem, 91-92
addition by subtraction strategy, 154
“the aggregation of marginal gains,” 13-14
agricultural expansion example of doing that which requires the least effort, 149-51
Allen Carr’s Easy Way to Stop Smoking (Cart), 125-26
amateurs vs. professionals, 236
animal behavior
within an immediate-return environment, 187
cat escape study, 43-44
greylag geese and supernormal stimuli, 102
herring gulls and supernormal stimuli, 101-102
methods for sensing and understanding the world, 84
Art & Fear (Bayles and Orland), 142n
Asch, Solomon, 118-20
athletes

Career Best Effort program (CBE), 242-44
comparing champions of different sports, 217-18
examples of reflection and review, 244-45
handling the boredom of training, 233-34
Los Angeles Lakers example of reflection and review, 242-44
use of motivation rituals,
atomic habits
cumulative effect of stacking, 251-52
defined, 27
automaticity, 144-46
automating a habit
cash register example, 171-72
table of onetime actions that lock in good habits, 173
Thomas Frank example of automating a habit contract, 210
using technology, 173-75

awareness
Habits Scorecard, 64-66
of nonconscious habits, 62
Pointing-and-Calling subway safety system, 62-63

bad habits
breaking (table), 97, 137, 179, 213,
reducing exposure to the cues that cause them, 94-95,
behavior change
Cardinal Rule of Behavior Change, 186, 189
four laws of, 53-55, 186, 252-53 (see also specific numbered laws)
learning curves, 14546
three layers of, 29-31
benefits of habits, 46-47, 239
“Better All the Time” (article), 154
biological considerations
“Big Five” personality traits, 220-22
genes, 218-21, 226-27
boredom, 233-36
Brailsford, Dave, 13-14
the brain

career choices and brain differences, 143-44
dopamine-driven feedback loops, 105-108
evolutionary similarity of, 187

as habits are created, 45~46

Hebb’s Law, 143

inaccurate perceptions of threats, 189n

long-term potentiation, 143
physical changes in the brain due to repetition, 143-44
System 1 vs. System 2 thinking, 232n, 261
“wanting” vs. “liking” rewards, 106-108, 263
breakthrough moments
ice cube melting example, 20-21
British Cycling, 13-15, 25, 243
Budris, Caed, 260
building a habit
four-step process
1. cue, 47-48
2. craving, 48
3. response, 48-49
4, reward, 49
problem phase and solution phase, 51-53
lessons from, 259-64
business applications of habit strategies, 265
Byme, Ronan, 108-109

cash register example of automating a habit, 171-72
cat escape study, 43-44
changing your mind-set from “have to” to “get to,” 130-31
Cho, Margaret, 210
choosing the right opportunities
combining your skills to reduce the competition, 225-26
explore/exploit trade-off, 223-25
importance of, 222-23
specialization, 226
Clark, Brian, 33
commitment devices, 170-71
compounding effect of small changes
airplane route example, 17
author’s college experiences, 6-7
negative results, 19
1 percent changes, 15-16, 17-18
positive results, 19
conditioning, 132-33
consequences of good and bad habits, 188-90, 206-207
context, 87-90
cravings

as the sense that something is missing, 129
timing of, 259, 2
and underlying motives,

cue-induced wanting, 93-94

cues

automatically picking up, 59-62
making predictions after perceiving, 128-29
obvious visual cues, 85-87
as part of the four-step process of building a habit, 47-48
selecting cues for habit stacking, 77-79
culture
imitation of community habits and standards, 115-18
Nerd Fitness example of similarity within a group, 117-18
Polgar family chess example of the role of, 113-14, 122
curiosity, 261

Damasio, Antonio, 130
Darwin, Charles, 115
decision journal, 245,
decisive moments, 160-62
desire, 129-30, 263-64
Diderot, Denis, 72-73
Diderot Effect, 73
“don’t break the chain,” 196-97
dopamine-driven feedback loops, 105~108
downside of habits, 239-40
Dyrsmid, Trent, 195

emotions, 129-30, 261-62, 263-64
energy and likelihood of action, 151-52
environment
and context, 87-90
creating an environment where doing the right thing is as easy as possible, 155
dedicated spaces for different activities, 87-90
delayed-return, 187-90
Dutch electrical meter example of obvious cues,
effect of environment on an addiction, 92
immediate-return, 187-90
Lewin’s Equation for human behavior, 83
Massachusetts General Hospital cafeteria example of design change, 81-82

priming your environment, 156-58

redesigning your environment, 86-87

suggestion impulse buying, 83

Vietnam War heroin addiction problem example, $
exercise study of implementation intention, 69-70
expectations, 262-63, 264
explore/exploit trade-off, 223-25
Eyal, Nir, 170

failure, 263
feedback loops
in all human behavior, 45
dopamine-driven, 105-108
formation of all habits that shape one’s identity, 40
habit, 49-51
feelings, 129-30, 261-62, 263-64
Ist Law of Behavior Change (Make It Obvious)
Habits Scorecard, 64-66
habit stacking, 74-79, 110-11
habit tracking, 197
implementation intention, 69-72
making the cues of bad habits invisible, 94-95
Fisher, Roger, 205-206
flow state, 224, 232-33,
Fogg, BJ, 72, 74
food science
“bliss point” for each product, 103
cravings for junk food, 102-103
dynamic contrast of processed foods, 103
orosensation, 103
four laws of behavior change, 53-55, 186, 252-53, See also specific numbered laws
four-step process of building a habit
1. cue, 47-48
2. craving, 48
3. response, 48-49
4, reward, 49
habit loop, 49-51
lessons from, 2:
problem phase and solution phase, 51-
4th Law of Behavior Change (Make It Satisfying)
habit contract, 207-10
habit tracking, 198-99
instant gratification, 188-93
making the cues of bad habits unsatisfying, 205-206
Safeguard soap in Pakistan example, 184-85,
Frankl, Victor, 260
Franklin, Benjamin, 196
frequency’s effect on habits, 145-47
friction

53

associated with a behavior, 152-58
garden hose example of reducing, 153
Japanese factory example of eliminating wasted time and effort, 154~
to prevent unwanted behavior, 157-58

“gateway habit,” 163
genes, 218-21, 226-27
goals
effect on happiness, 26
fleeting nature of, 25
shared by winners and losers, 24-25
short-term effects of, 26-27
vs. systems, 23-24
the Goldilocks Rule
flow state, 224, 232-33
the Goldilocks Zone, 232
tennis example, 231
good habits
creating (table), 96, 136, 178, 212
Two-Minute Rule, 162-67
Goodhart, Charles, 203
Goodhart’s Law, 203
Graham, Paul, 247-48
greylag geese and supernormal stimuli, 102
Guerrouj, Hicham El, 217-18, 225
Guns, Germs, and Steel (Diamond), 149-51

habit contract
Bryan Harris weight loss example, 208-209
defined, 208
seat belt law example, 207-208
Thomas Frank alarm example, 210

habit line, 145-47
habit loop, 49-51
habits

of avoidance, 191-92
benefits of, 46-47, 239
breaking bad habits (table), 97, 137,
in the business world, 265
changing your mind-set about,
creating good habits (table), 96, 136, 178, 212
downside of, 239-40
effect on the rest of your day, 160, 162
eliminating bad habits, 94-95
as the embodiment of identity, 36-38
formation of, 44-46, 14547
four-step process of building a habit, 47-53, 259-64
“gateway habit,” 163
identity-based, 31, 39-40
imitation of others’ habits
the close, 116-18
the many, 118-21
the powerful, 121-22
importance of, 40-41
outcome-based, 31
and parenting, 267
reframing habits to highlight their benefits, 131-32
short-term and long-term consequences of, 188-90
sticking with, 230-31
suitability for your personality, 221-22
Two-Minute Rule, 162-67
using implementation intention to start, 71~72
Habits Academy, 8
habit shaping, 165-67
Habits Scorecard, 64-66
habit stacking
combining temptation bundling with, 110-11
explained, 74~79
habit tracking, 196-200, 202-204
handwashing in Pakistan example of a satisfying behavior change, 184-85,
happiness

as the absence of desire, 259-60
and goals, 26
relativity of, 263,

Harris, Bryan, 208-209

Hebb, Donald, 143
Hebb’s Law, 143

herring gulls and supernormal stimuli, 101-102

hope, 264

Hreha, Jason, 45

Hugo, Victor, 169-70
The Hunchback of Notre Dame (Hugo), 169-70

hyperbolic discounting (time inconsistency), 188-89

identity
accepting blanket personal statements as facts, 35.
and behavior change, 29-32, 34-36
behavior that is at odds with the self, 32-33
habits as the embodiment of, 36-38, 247-49
identity-based habits, 31, 39-40
letting a single belief define you, 247-49
pride in a particular aspect of one’s identity, 33-34
reinforcing your desired identity by using the Two-Minute Rule, 165
two-step process of changing your identity, 39-40
implementation intention, 69-72
improvements, making small, 231-32, 233, 253
instant gratification, 188-93

Johnson, Magic, 243-44
journaling, 165
Jung, Carl, 62

Kamb, Steve, 117-18
Kubitz, Andrew, 109

Lao Tzu, 249
Tao Te Ching, 249
Latimore, Fd, 132
Lewes, George H., 144.

long-term potentiation, 143

Los Angeles Lakers example of reflection and review, 242~44
Luby, Stephen, 183-85

MacMullan, Jackie, 2
Martin, Steve, 229-30, 231.
Massachusetts General Hospital cafeteria example of environment design change, 81-82
Massimino, Mike, 117
mastery, 240-42
Mate, Gabor, 219
McKeown, Greg, 165
measurements
usefulness of, 202-204
visual, 195-96
Mike (Turkish travel guide/ex-smoker), 125-26
Milner, Peter, 105
mind-set shifts
from “have to” to “get to,” 130-31
motivation rituals, 132-33
reframing habits to highlight their benefits, 131-32
motion vs. action, 14243
motivation
the Goldilocks Rule, 231-33
maximum motivation, 232
rituals, 132-33
and taking action, 260-61
Murphy, Morgan, 91

negative compounding, 19
Niewsche, Friedrich, 260
nonconscious activities, 34n
nonscale victories, 203-204
novelty, 234

Nuckols, Oswald, 156

observations, 260

obstacles to getting what you want, 152

Olds, James, 105,

Olwell, Patty, 93

1 percent changes
Career Best Effort program (CBE), 242-44
compounding effect of making changes, 15-16, 17-18
Sorites Paradox, 251-52

operant conditioning, 9-10

opportunities, choosing the right
combining your skills to reduce the competition, 225-26
explore/exploit trade-off, 223-25
importance of, 222-23
specialization, 226

outcomes
and behavior change, 29-31
outcome-based habits, 31

pain, 206-207
Paper Clip Strategy of visual progress measurements, 195-96
parenting applications of habit strategies, 267
Patterson, John Henry, 171-72
Phelps, Michael, 217-18, 225
photography class example of active practice, 141-42, 144
Plateau of Latent Potential, 21-23
pleasure
anticipating vs. experiencing, 106-108
image of, 260
repeating a behavior when it’s a satisfying sensory experience, 184-86, 264
Safeguard soap example, 184-85
Plomin, Robert, 220
Pointing-and-Calling subway safety system, 62-63
positive compounding, 19
The Power of Habit (Duhigg), 9, 47n
predictions, making
after perceiving cues, 128-29
the human brain as a prediction machine, 60-61
Premack, David, 110
Premack’s Principle, 110
pride
manicure example, 33
in a particular aspect of one’s identity, 33-34
priming your environment to make the next action easy, 156-58
problem phase of a habit loop,
process and behavior change, 30-31
professionals vs. amateurs, 236,
progress, 262
proximity’s effect on behavior, 116-18

quitting smoking,

reading resources
Atomic Habits newsletter, 257
business applications of habit strategies, 265
parenting applications of habit strategies, 267
recovering when habits break down, 200-202
reflection and review
author’s Annual Review and Integrity Report, 245~46
benefits of, 246-47
Career Best Effort program (CBE) example, 242-44
Chris Rock example, 245
Eliud Kipchoge example, 244-45
flexibility and adaptation, 247-49
importance of, 244-45
Katie Ledecky example, 245
reframing habits to highlight their benefits, 131-32
reinforcement, 191-93
repetition
as active practice of a new habit, 144
automaticity, 144-46
to master a habit, 143
photography class example of active practice, 141-42, 144
responding to things based on emotions, 261-62
rewards
after sacrifice, 262
immediate vs. delayed, 187-90
purpose of, 49
reinforcement, 191-93
training yourself to delay gratification, 190-93
variable rewards, 2
“wanting” vs, “liking,” 1
Riis, Jacob, 21
Riley, Michael, 60,
Riley, Pat, 242-44
Ritty, James, 171-72
Robins, Lee, 91-92

sacrifice, 262
satisfaction
as the completion of the habit loop, 186
and expectations, 262-63
pleasurable sensory experiences, 184-86
2nd Law of Behavior Change (Make It Attractive)
‘ABC Thursday night TV lineup example, 109
desire for approval, respect, and praise, 121-22
habit tacking, 198
highly engineered versions of reality, 104
making the cues of bad habits unattractive, 126
supernormal stimuli, 102
temptation bundling, 108-11
Seinfeld, Jerry, 196-97
self-control
controlling the environment to achieve, 92-93
cue-induced wanting, 93-94
difficulty of, 262
riding and smoking example of controlling your environment, 93
as a short-term strategy, 95

the senses
Safeguard soap example, 184-85
toothpaste example of a satisfying behavior change, 186
vision, 84, 85-87
Wrigley chewing gum example, 18:
showing up, mastering the art of, 163-64, 201-202, 236
Skinner, B. F., 9-10, 235n
smoking, quitting, 32, 125-26
social media, 174-75
social norms

Asch’s social conformity line experiments, 118-20
downside of going along with the group, 120-21
herd mentality, 115

imitation of others’ habits
the close, 116-18
the many, 118-21
the powerful, 121-22
solution phase of a habit loop,
Sorites Paradox, 251-52
starting a habit, 71-72
Steele, Robert, 91.
Stern, Hawkins, 83
success

accepting where your strengths are, 218-19
importance of feeling successful, 190
suffering, 262
suggestion impulse buying, 83
supernormal stimuli, 102
Suroweicki, James, 154
System 1 vs, System 2 thinking, 232n, 261

systems
changes to solve problems, 25
as a cycle of continuous improvement, 26-27
vs. goals, 23-24

technology

for automating a habit, 173-75
social media, 174-75
temptation bundling, 108-11
3rd Law of Behavior Change (Make It Easy)
agricultural expansion example of using the least effort, 149-51
energy requirements and likelihood of action, 151-52
friction associated with a behavior, 152-58
garden hose example of reducing friction, 153
“gateway habit,” 163
Japanese factory example of addition by subtraction, 154-55
making the cues of bad habits difficult, 169-70
onetime actions that lead to better habits, 172~74
Principle of Least Action, 151n
repetition as the key to habit formation, 146-47
Two-Minute Rule, 162-67
Twyla Tharp example of a daily ritual, 159-60
‘Thorndike, Anne, 81-82
Thorndike, Edward, 43-44
time inconsistency, 188-89
Tinbergen, Niko, 101-102
toothpaste example of a satisfying behavior change, 186
tracking a habit
automated, 199
combining habit stacking with habit tracking, 200
manual, 199-200
usefulness of, 202-204
trajectory of your current path, 18
two-step process of changing your identity, 39~40

Uelsmann, Jerry, 141-42
Ulysses pact (Ulysses contract), 170n
underlying motives and cravings, 127-28, 130

Valley of Disappointment, 20, 22
variable rewards, 235
Vietnam War heroin addiction problem, 91-92
vision
impact on human behavior, 84
obvious visual cues, 85-87
visual measurements, 195-96

weight loss
nonscale victories, 203-204
using a habit contract to ensure, 208-209

Yerkes-Dodson law, 232

ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPORSTUVWXYZ

About the Author

James Clear's work has appeared in the New York Times, Time, and
Entrepreneur, and on CBS This Morning, and is taught in colleges around the
world. His website, jamesclear.com, receives millions of visitors each month,
and hundreds of thousands subscribe to his email newsletter. He is the creator of
The Habits Academy, the premier training platform for organizations and
individuals that are interested in building better habits in life and work.
Penguin
Random House
PENGUIN PUBLISHING GROUP

What’s next on
your reading list?

Discover your next
great read!

Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author.

Sign up now.
* Interested readers can learn more at habitsacademy.com.
* As this book was going to print, new information about the British Cycling
team has come out. You can see my thoughts at atomichabits.com/cycling.

* T geeked out and actually calculated this. Washington, D.C., is about 225 miles
from New York City. Assuming you are flying on a 747 or an Airbus A380,
changing the heading by 3.5 degrees as you leave Los Angeles likely causes the
nose of the airplane to shift between 7.2 to 7.6 feet, or about 86 to 92 inches. A
very small shift in direction can lead to a very meaningful change in destination.
* The terms unconscious, nonconscious, and subconscious can all be used to
describe the absence of awareness or thought. Even in academic circles, these
words are often used interchangeably without much nitpicking (for once).
Nonconscious is the term I’m going to use because it is broad enough to
encompass both the processes of the mind we could never consciously access
and the moments when we are simply not paying attention to what surrounds us.
Nonconscious is a description of anything you are not consciously thinking
about.

* Certainly, there are some aspects of your identity that tend to remain
unchanged over time—like identifying as someone who is tall or short. But even
for more fixed qualities and characteristics, whether you view them in a positive
or negative light is determined by your experiences throughout life.
* Readers of The Power of Habit by Charles Duhigg will recognize these terms.
Duhigg wrote a great book and my intention is to pick up where he left off by
integrating these stages into four simple laws you can apply to build better habits
in life and work.

* Charles Duhigg and Nir Eyal deserve special recognition for their influence on
this image. This representation of the habit loop is a combination of language
that was popularized by Duhigg’s book, The Power of Habit, and a design that
was popularized by Eyal’s book, Hooked.
* When I visited Japan, I saw this strategy save a woman’s life. Her young son
stepped onto the Shinkansen, one of Japan’s famous bullet trains that travel at
over two hundred miles per hour, just as the doors were closing. She was left
outside on the platform and jammed her arm through the door to grab him. With
her arm stuck in the door, the train was about to take off, but right before it
pulled away an employee performed a safety check by Pointing-and-Calling up
and down the platform. In less than five seconds, he noticed the woman and
managed to stop the train from leaving. The door opened, the woman—now in
tears—ran to her son, and a minute later the train departed safely.

* Interested readers can get a template to create their own Habits Scorecard at
atomichabits.com/scorecard.
* In addition to her payment for the library, Catherine the Great asked Diderot to
keep the books until she needed them and offered to pay him a yearly salary to
act as her librarian.

* Fogg refers to this strategy as the “Tiny Habits recipe,” but I'll call it the habit
stacking formula throughout the book.
* Tf you’re looking for more examples and guidance, you can download a Habit
Stacking template at atomichabits.com/habitstacking.

* Dopamine is not the only chemical that influences your habits. Every behavior
involves multiple brain regions and neurochemicals, and anyone who claims that
“habits are all about dopamine” is skipping over major portions of the process. It
is just one of the important role players in habit formation. However, I will
single out the dopamine circuit in this chapter because it provides a window into
the biological underpinnings of desire, craving, and motivation that are behind
every habit.
* I’m so happy I was able to fit a Game of Thrones reference into this book.

* This is just a partial list of underlying motives. I offer a more complete list and
more examples of how to apply them to business at atomichabits.com/business.
* A similar story is told in the book Art & Fear by David Bayles and Ted
Orland. It has been adapted here with permission. See the endnotes for a full
explanation.

* This is a foundational principle in physics, where it is known as the Principle
of Least Action. It states that the path followed between any two points will
always be the path requiring the least energy. This simple principle underpins
the laws of the universe. From this one idea, you can describe the laws of motion
and relativity.
* The phrase addition by subtraction is also used by teams and businesses to
describe removing people from a group in order to make the team stronger
overall.

* To be fair, this still sounds like an amazing night.
* T designed a habit journal specifically to make journaling easier. It includes a
“One Line Per Day” section where you simply write one sentence about your
day. You can learn more at atomichabits.com/journal.

* The irony of how closely this story matches my process of writing this book is
not lost on me. Although my publisher was much more accommodating, and my
closet remained full, I did feel like I had to place myself on house arrest to finish
the manuscript.
* This is also referred to as a “Ulysses pact” or a “Ulysses contract.” Named
after Ulysses, the hero of The Odyssey, who told his sailors to tie him to the mast
of the ship so that he could hear the enchanting song of the Sirens but wouldn’t
be able to steer the ship toward them and crash on the rocks. Ulysses realized the
benefits of locking in your future actions while your mind is in the right place
rather than waiting to see where your desires take you in the moment.
* The shift to a delayed-return environment likely began around the advent of
agriculture ten thousand years ago when farmers began planting crops in
anticipation of a harvest months later. However, it was not until recent centuries
that our lives became filled with delayed-return choices: career planning,
retirement planning, vacation planning, and everything else that occupies our
calendars.

* Time inconsistency is also referred to as hyperbolic discounting.
* This can derail our decision making as well. The brain overestimates the
danger of anything that seems like an immediate threat but has almost no
likelihood of actually occurring: your plane crashing during a bit of turbulence, a
burglar breaking in while you’re home alone, a terrorist blowing up the bus
you’re on. Meanwhile, it underestimates what appears to be a distant threat but is
actually very likely: the steady accumulation of fat from eating unhealthy food,
the gradual decay of your muscles from sitting at a desk, the slow creep of
clutter when you fail to tidy up.

* [Interested readers can find a _ habit tracker template at
atomichabits.com/tracker.
* You can see the actual Habit Contracts used by Bryan Harris and get a blank
template at atomichabits.com/contract.

* Tf you are interested in taking a personality test, you can find links to the most
reliable tests here: atomichabits.com/personality.
* Tf it’s Harry Potter on repeat, I feel you.

* T have a pet theory about what happens when we achieve a flow state. This
isn’t confirmed. It’s just my guess. Psychologists commonly refer to the brain as
operating in two modes: System 1 and System 2. System 1 is fast and instinctual.
Generally speaking, processes you can perform very quickly (like habits) are
governed by System 1. Meanwhile, System 2 controls thinking processes that are
more effortful and slow—like calculating the answer to a difficult math problem.
With regard to flow, I like to imagine System 1 and System 2 as residing on
opposite ends of the spectrum of thinking. The more automatic a cognitive
process is, the more it slides toward the System 1 side of the spectrum. The more
effortful a task is, the more it slides toward System 2. Flow, I believe, resides on
the razor’s edge between System 1 and System 2. You are fully using all of your
automatic and implicit knowledge related to the task while also working hard to
rise to a challenge beyond your ability. Both brain modes are fully engaged. The
conscious and nonconscious are working perfectly in sync.
* The discovery of variable rewards happened by accident. One day in the lab,
the famous Harvard psychologist B. F. Skinner was running low on food pellets
during one experiment and making more was a time-consuming process because
he had to manually press the pellets in a machine. This situation led him to “ask
myself why every press of the lever had to be reinforced.” He decided to only
give treats to the rats intermittently and, to his surprise, varying the delivery of
food did not decrease behavior, but actually increased it.

* T created a template for readers interested in keeping a decision journal. It is
included as part of the habit journal at atomichabits.com/journal.
* You can see my previous Annual Reviews at jamesclear.com/annual-review.

* You can see my previous Integrity Reports at jamesclear.com/integrity.
* Sorites is derived from the Greek word sorés, which means heap or pile.
